1.Alif Lam Mim.
2.That is the Book, where in is no doubt, a guidance to the god fearing.
3.who believe in the Unseen, and perform the prayer, and expend of thatWe have provided them.
4.who believe in what has been sent down to thee and what has been sent downbefore thee, and have faith in the Hereafter.
5.those are upon guidance from their Lord,those are the ones who prosper.
6.As for the unbelievers, alike it is to them whether thou hast warned themor hast not warned them, they do not believe.
7.God has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing,and ontheir eyes is a covering, and there awaits them a mighty chastisement.
8.And some men there are who say, `We believe in God and the Last Day'.but they are not believers.
9.They would trick God and the believers, and only themselves they deceive,and they are not aware.
10.In their hearts is a sickness, and God has incresed their sickness,and there awaits them a painful chastisementfor that they have cried lies.
11.When it is said to them, `Do not corruption in the land',they say, `We are only ones that put things right.
12.Truly, they are the workers of corruption but they are not aware.
13.When it is said to them, `Believe as the people believe',they say, `Shall we believe, as fools believe?'Truly, they are the foolish ones, but they do not know.
14.When they meet those who believe, they say, `We believe'.but when they go privily to their Satans, they say,`We are with you. we were only mocking.
15.God shall mock them, and shall lead them onblindly wandering in their insolence.
16.Those are they that have bought error at the price of guidance,and their commerce has not profited them,and they are not right-guided.
17.The likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled a fire,and when it lit all about him God took away their light,and left them in darkness unseeing.
18.deaf, dumb, blind--so they shall not return.
19.or as a cloudburst out of heaven in which is darkness, and thunder,and lightning--they put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps,fearful of death and God encompasses the unbelievers.
20.the lightning wellnigh snatches away their sight.whensoever it gives them light, they walk in it,and when the darkness is over them, they halt.had God willed, He would have taken away their hearing and their sight.Truly, God is powerful over everything.
21.O you men, serve your Lord Who created you, and those that were before you.haply so you will be godfearing.
22.who assigned to you the earth for a couch, and heaven for an edifice,and sent down out of heaven water, wherewith He brought forth fruitsfor your provision. so set not up compeers to God wittingly.
23.And if you are in doubt concerning that We have sent down on Our servant,then bring a sura like it, and call your witnesses, apart from God,if you are truthful.
24.And if you do not--and you will not--then fear the Fire,whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for unbelievers.
25.Give thou good tidings to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness,that for them await gardens underneath which rivers flow.whensoever they are provided with fruits therefromthey shall say, `This is that wherewithal we were provided before'.that they shall be given in perfect semblance. and the for them shall bespouses purified. therein they shall dwell forever.
26.God is not ashamed to strike a similitude even of a gnat, or aught above it.As for the believers, they know it is the truth from their Lord.but as for unbelievers, they say, `What did God desire by thisfor a similitude? Thereby He leads many astray, and thereby He guides many.and thereby He leads none astray save the ungodly.
27.such as break the covenant of God after its solemn binding, and such as cutwhat God has commanded should be joined,and such as do corruption in the land--they shall be the losers.
28.How do you disbelieve in God, seeing you were deadand He gave you life, then He shall make you dead,then He shall give you life, then unto Him you shall be returned?.
29.It is He who created for you all that isin the earth, then He lifted Himself to heavenand levelled them seven heavens. and He has knowledge of everything.
30.And when thy Lord said to the angels, `I am setting in the earth a viceroy.'They said, `What, wilt Thou set therein one who will do corruption there,and shed blood, while We proclaim Thy praise and call Thee Holy?'He said, `Assuredly I know that you know not.
31.And He taught Adam the names, all of them. then He presented themunto the angels and said, `Now tell Me the names of these,if you speak truly.
32.They said, `Glory be to Thee! We know not savewhat Thou hast taught us.Surely Thou art the All-knowing, the All-wise.
33.He said, `Adam tell them their names.'And when he had told them their names He said, `Did I not tell you I knowthe unseen things of the heavens and earth?And I know what things you reveal, and what you were hiding.
34.And when We said to the angels, `Bow yourselves to Adam'. so they bowedthemselves, save Iblis. he refused, and waxed proud, and so he becameone of the unbelievers.
35.And We said, Adam, dwell thou, and thy wife, in the Garden,and eat thereof easefully where you desire. but draw not nigh this tree,lest you be evildoers.
36.Then Satan caused them to slip therefrom and brought them out of thatthey were in. and We said, `Get you all down, each of you an enemy of each.and in the earth a sojourn shall be yours, and enjoyment for a time.
37.Thereafter Adam received certain words from his Lord, and He turned towardshim. truly He turns, and is All-compassionate.
38.We said, `Get you down out of it, all together. yet there shall come to youguidance from Me, and whosoever follows My guidance,no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.As for the unbelievers who cry lies to Our signs.
39.those shall be the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
40.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you,and fulfil My covenant and I shall fulfil your covenant. and haveawe of Me.
41.And believe in that I have sent down, confirming that which is with you,and be not the first to disbelieve in it.And sell not My signsfor a little price. and fear you Me.
42.And do not confound the truth with vanity, and do not conceal the truthwittingly.
43.And perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and bow with those that bow.
44.Will you bid others to piety, and forget yourselves while you recite the Book?Do you not understand?.
45.Seek you help in patience and prayer, for grievous it is,save to the humble.
46.who reckon that they shall meet their Lord and that unto Him they arereturning.
47.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you, and that Ihave preferred you above all beings.
48.and beware of a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction,and no intercession shall be accepted from it, nor any counterpoisebe taken, neither shall they be helped.
49.And when We delivered you from the folk of Pharaoh who were visiting you withevil chastisement, slaughtering your sons, and sparing your women. and in thatwas a grievous trial from your Lord.
50.And when We divided for you the sea and delivered you, and drowned Pharaoh'sfolk while you were beholding.
51.And when We appointed with Moses forty nights then you took to yourselves theCalf after him and you were evildoers.
52.then We pardoned you after that, that haply you should be thankful.
53.And when We gave to Moses the Book and the Salvation, that haplyyou should be guided.
54.And when Moses said to his people, `My people, you have done wrong againstyourselves by your taking the Calf. now turn to your Creatorand slay one another.That will be better for you in your Creator's sight,and He will turn to you. truly He turns, and is All-compassionate.
55.And when you said, `Moses, we will not believe thee till we see God openly'.and the thunderbolt took you while you were beholding.
56.Then We raised you up after you were dead, that haplyyou should be thankful.
57.And We outspread the cloud to overshadow you, and We sent down manna andquails upon you: `Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you.'And they worked no wrong upon Us, but themselves they wronged.
58.And when We said, `Enter this township, and eat easefully of it wherever youwill, and enter in at the gate, prostrating, and say, Unburdening. We willforgive you your transgressions, and increase the good-doers.
59.Then the evildoers substituted a saying other than that which had beensaid to them. so We sent down upon the evildoers wrath out of heavenfor their ungodliness.
60.And when Moses sought water for his people, so We said, `Strike with thystaff the rock'. and there gushed forth from it twelve fountains. all thepeople knew now their drinking-place.`Eat and drink of God's providing, andmischief not in the earth, doing corruption.
61.And when you said, `Moses, we will not endure one sort of food. pray to theyLord for us, that He may bring forth for us of that the earth produces--greenherbs, cucumbers, corn, lentils, onions.'  He said, `Would you have inexchange what is meaner for what is better?  Get you down to Egypt. you shallhave there that you demanded.' And abasement and poverty were pitched uponthem, and they were laden with the burden of God's anger. that, because theyhad disbelieved the signs of God and slain the Prophets unrightfully. that,because they disobeyed, and were transgressors.
62.Surely they that believe, and those of Jewry, and the Christians, and thoseSabaeans, whoso believes in God and the Last Day, and works righteousness--their wage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neithershall they sorrow.
63.And when We tookcompact with you, and raised above you the Mount: `Takeforcefully what We have given you, and remember what is in it. haply youshall be godfearing.
64.Then you turned away thereafter, and but for the bounty and mercy of Godtowards you, you had been of the losers.
65.And well you know there were those among you that transgressed the Sabbath,and We said to them, `Be you apes, miserably slinking!.
66.And We made it a punishment exemplary for all the former times and for thelatter, and an admonition to such as are godfearing.
67.And when Moses said to his people, `God commands you to sacrifice a cow.'They said, `Dost thou take us in mockery?' He said, I take refuge with God,lest I should be one of the ignorant.
68.`They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He may make clear to us what shemay be.' He said, `He says she is a cow neither old, nor virgin, middlingbetween the two. so do that you are bidden.
69.They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He make clear to us what her colourmay be.' He said, `He says she shall be a golden cow, bright her colour,gladdening the beholders.
70.They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He make clear to us what she may be.cows are much alike to us. and, if God will, we shall thenbe guided.
71.He said, `He says she shall be a cow not broken to plough the earth or towater the tillage, one kept secure, with no blemish on her.' They said,`Now thou hast brought the truth'. and therefore they sacrificed her, a thingthey had scarcely done.
72.And when you killed a living soul, and disputed thereon--and God disclosedwhat you were hiding.
73.so We said, `Smite him with part of it,. even so God brings to life the dead,and He shows you His signs, that haply you may have understanding.
74.Then your hearts became hardened thereafter and are like stones, or even yetharder. for there are stones from which rivers come gushing, and others split,so that water issues from them, and others crash down in the fear of God.AndGod is not heedless of the things you do.
75.Are you then so eager that they should believe you, seeing there is a partyof them that heard God's word, and then tampered with it, and that after theyhad comprehended it, wittingly?.
76.And when they meet those who believe, they say `We believe'. and when they goprivily one to another, they say, `Do you speak to them of what God hasrevealed to you, that they may thereby dispute with you before your Lord?Have you no understanding?.
77.Know they not that God knows what they keep secret and what they publish?.
78.And some there are of them that are common folk not knowing the Book,but only fancies and mere conjectures.
79.So woe to those who write the Book with their hands, then say, `This is fromGod,' that they may sell it for a little price. so woe to them for what theirhands have written, and woe to them for their earnings.
80.And they say, `The Fire shall not touch us save a number of days.'Say: `Have you taken with God a covenant?  God will not fail in Hiscovenant. or say you things against God of which youknow nothing?.
81.Not so. whoso earns evil, and is encompassed by his transgression--those arethe inhabitants of the Fire. there they shall dwell forever.
82.And those that believe, and do deeds of righteousness--those are theinhabitants of Paradise. there they shall dwell forever.
83.And when We took compact with the Children of Israel: `You shall not serveany save God. and to be good to parents, and the near kinsman, and toorphans, and to the needy. and speak good to men, and perform the prayer, andpay the alms.' Then you turned away, all but a few of you, swerving aside.
84.And when We took compact with you: `You shall not shed your own blood,neither expel your own from your habitations'. then you confirmed it andyourselves bore witness.
85.Then there you are killing one another, and expelling a party of youfrom their habitations, conspiring against them in sin and enmity. and ifthey come to you as captives, you ransom them. yet their expulsionwas forbidden you.What, do you believe in part of the Book, anddisbelievein part?  What shall be the recompense of those of you who do that,but degradation in the present life, and on the Day of Resurrection to bereturned unto the most terrible of chastisement?  And God is not heedless ofthe things you do.
86.Those who have purchased the present life at the price of the world to come--for them the chastisement shall not be lightened, neither shall theybe helped.
87.And We gave to Moses the Book, and after him sent succeeding Messengers.and We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear signs, and confirmed himwith the Holy Spirit. and whensoever there came to you a Messengerwith that your souls had not desire for, did you become arrogant, and somecry lies to, and some slay?.
88.And they say, `Our hearts are uncircumcised.' Nay, but God has cursed themfor their unbelief. little will they believe.
89.When there came to them a Book from God, confirming what was with them--and they aforetimes prayed for victory over the unbelievers--when there cameto them that they recognized, they disbelieved in it.and the curse of God is on the unbelievers.
90.Evil is the thing they have sold themselves for, disbelieving in that whichGod sent down, grudging that God should send down of His bounty on whomsoeverHe will of His servants, and they were laden with anger upon anger.and for unbelievers awaits a humbling chastisement.
91.And when they were told, `Believe in that God has sent down,' they said,`We believe in what was sent down on us'. and they disbelieve in what isbeyond that, yet it is the truth confirming what is with them.Say: `Why then were you slaying the Prophets of God in former time,if you were believers?.
92.And Moses came to you with the clear signs, then you took to yourselvesthe Calf after him and you were evildoers.
93.And when We took compact with you, and raised over you the Mount:`Take forcefully what We have given you and give ear.' They said,`We hear, and rebel'. and they were made to drink the Calf in their heartsfor their unbelief.Say: `Evil is the thing your faith bids you to,if you are believers.
94.Say: `If the Last Abode with God is yours exclusively, and not for otherpeople, then long for death--if you speak truly.
95.But they will never long for it, because of thattheir hands have forwarded. God knows the evildoers.
96.and thou shalt find them the eagerest of men for life. And of the idolaters.there is one of them wishes if he might be spared a thousand years,yet his being spared alive shall not remove him from the chastisement.God sees the things they do.
97.Say: `Whosoever is and enemy to Gabriel--he it was that brought it down uponthy heart by the leave of God, confirming what was before it.and for a guidance and good tidings to the believers.
98.Whosoever is an enemy to God and His angels and His Messengers, and Gabriel,and Michael--surely God is an enemy to the unbelievers.
99.And We have sent down unto thee signs, clear signs, and none disbelieves inthem except the ungodly.
100.Why, whensoever they have made a covenant, does a party of them rejectit?Nay, but the most of them are unbelievers.
101.When there has come to them a Messenger from God confirming what was withthem, a party of them that were given the Book reject the Book of Godbehind their backs, as though they knew not.
102.and they follow what the Satans recited over Solomon's kingdom.Solomon disbelieved not, but the Satans disbelieved, teachingthe people sorcery, and that which was sent down upon Babylon's two angels,Harut and Marut. they taught not any man, without they said,`We are but a temptation. do not disbelieve.'From them they learned how they might divide a man and his wife,yet they did not hurt any man thereby, save by the leave of God,and they learned what hurt them, and did not profit them, knowing wellthat whoso buys it shall have no share in the world to come.evil then was that they sold themselves for, if they had but known.
103.Yet had they believed, and been godfearing,a recompense from God had been better, if they had but known.
104.O believers, do not say, `Observe us,' but say, `Regard us'. and give ear.for unbelievers awaits a painful chastisement.
105.Those unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters wish notthat any good should be sent down upon you from your Lord. but God singlesout for His mercy whom He will. God is of bounty abounding.
106.And for whatever verse We abrogate or cast into oblivion, We bring a betteror the like of it. knowest thou not that God is powerful over everything?.
107.Knowest thou not that to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and theearth, and that you have none, apart from God, neither protector nor helper?.
108.Or do you desire to question your Messenger as Moses was questioned informer time?  Whoso exchanges belief for unbelief has surely strayedfrom the right way.
109.Many of the People of the Book wish they might restore you as unbelievers,after you have believed, in the jealousy of their souls, after the truthhas become clear to them. yet do you pardon and be forgiving, till God bringsHis command. truly God is powerful over everything.
110.And perform the prayer, and pay the alms. whatever good you shall forwardto your souls' account, you shall find it with God. assuredly God sees thethings you do.
111.And they say, `None shall enter Paradise except that they be Jews orChristians.'  Such are their fancies.Say: `Produce your proof,if you speak truly.
112.Nay, but whosoever submits his will to God, being a good--doer, his wage iswith his Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
113.The Jews say, `The Christians stand not on anything'.the Christians say, `They Jews stand not on anything'.yet they recite the Book.So too the ignorant say the like of them.God shall decide between them on the Day of Resurrectiontouching their differences.
114.And who does greater evil than he who bars God's places of worship,so that His Name be not rehearsed in them, and strives to destroy them?Such men might never enter them, save in fear. for them is degradation inthe present world, and in the world tocome a mighty chastisement.
115.To God belong the East and the West. whithersoever you turn, there is theFace of God. God is All-embracing, All-knowing.
116.And they say, `God has taken to Him a son.' Glory be to Him!  Nay, to Himbelongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. all obey His will .
117.the Creator of the heavens and the earth.and when He decrees a thing, He but says to it `Be', and it is.
118.And they that know not say, `Why does God not speak to us?Why does a sign not come to us?' So spoke those before them as these men say.their hearts are much alike.Yet We have made clear the signs unto a peoplewho are sure.
119.We have sent thee with the truth, good tidings to bear, and warning.Thou shalt not be questioned touching the inhabitants of Hell.
120.Never will the Jews be satisfied with thee,neither the Christians, not till thou followesttheir religion.Say: `God's guidance is the true guidance.' If thou followesttheir caprices, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou shalt haveagainst God neither protector nor helper.
121.Those to whom We have given the Book and who recite it with true recitation,they believe in it. and whoso disbelieves in it, they shall be the losers.
122.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you, and that Ihave preferred you above all beings.
123.and beware a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction,and no counterpoise shall be accepted from it, nor any intercession shall beprofitable to it, neither shall they be helped.
124.And when his Lord tested Abraham with certain words, and he fulfilled them.He said, `Behold, I make you a leader for the people.' Said he, `And of myseed?' He said `My covenant shall not reach the evildoers.
125.And when We appointed the House to be a place of visitation for the people,and a sanctuary, and: `Take to yourselves Abraham's station for a place ofprayer.' And We made covenant with Abraham and Ishmael: `Purify My House forthose that shall go about it and those that cleave to it, to those whobowand prostrate themselves.
126.And when Abraham said, `My Lord, make this a land secure, and provide itspeople with fruits, such of them as believe in God and the Last Day.' Hesaid, `And whoso disbelieves, to him I shall give enjoyment a little, then Ishall compel him to the chastisement of the Fire--how evil a homecoming!.
127.And when Abraham, and Ishmael with him, raised up the foundations of theHouse: `Our Lord, receive this from us. Thou artthe All-hearing , the All-knowing.
128.and, our Lord, make us submissive to Thee, and of our seed a nationsubmissive to Thee. and show us our holy rites, and turn towards us. surelyThou turnest, and art All-compassionate.
129.and, our Lord, do Thou send among them a Messenger, one of them, who shallrecite to them Thy signs, and teach them the Book and the Wisdom, and purifythem. Thou art the All-mighty, the All-wise.
130.Who therefore shrinks from the religion of Abraham, except he befoolish-minded?  Indeed, We chose him in the present world,and in the world to come he shall be among the righteous.
131.When his Lord said to him, `Surrender', he said, `I have surrendered me tothe Lord of all Being.
132.And Abraham charged his sons with this and Jacob likewise: `My sons, God haschosen for you the religion. see that you die not save in surrender.
133.Why, were you witnesses, when death came to Jacob?  When he said to his sons,`What will you serve after me?' They said, `We will serve thy God and the Godof thy fathers Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac, One God. to Him we surrender.
134.That is a nation that has passed away. there awaits them that they haveearned, and there awaits you that you have earned. you shall not bequestioned concerning the things they did.
135.And they say, `Be Jews or Christians and you shall be guided.' Say thou:`Nay, rather the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith. he was noidolater.
136.Say you: `We believe in God, and in that which has been sent down on usand sent down on Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes,and thatwhich was given to Moses and Jesus and the Prophets, of theirLord. we make no division between any of them, and to Him we surrender.
137.And if they believe in the like of that you believe in, then they are trulyguided. but if they turn away, then they are clearly in schism. God willsuffice you for them. He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
138.the baptism of God. and who is there that baptizes fairer than God?Him we are serving.
139.Say: `Would you then dispute with us concerning God, who is our Lordand your Lord?  Our deeds belong to us, and to you belong your deeds.Him we serve sincerely.
140.Or do you say, "Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes--they wereJews, or they were Christians"?' Say: `Have you then greater knowledge, orGod?  And who does greater evil than he who conceals a testimony receivedfrom God?  And God is not heedless of the things you do.
141.That is a nation that has passed away. there awaits them that they haveearned, and there awaits you that you have earned. you shall not bequestioned concerning the things they did.
142.{?}The fools among the people will say, `What has turned them from the directionthey were facing in their prayers aforetime?' Say: `To God belong the Eastand the West. He guides whomsoever He will to a straight path.
143.Thus We appointed you a midmost nation that you might be witnesses to thepeople, and that the Messenger might be a witness to you. and We did notappoint the direction thou wast facing, except that We might know whofollowed the Messenger from him who turned on his heels--though it were agrave thing save for those whom God has guided. but God would never leaveyour faith to waste--truly, God is All-gentle with the people,All-compassionate.
144.We have seen thee turning thy face about in the heaven. now We will surelyturn thee to a direction that shall satisfy thee. Turn thy face towards theHoly Mosque. and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it. Those whohave been given the Book know it is the truth from their Lord. God is notheedless of the things they do.
145.Yet if thou shouldst bring to those that have been given the Book every sign,they will not follow thy direction. thou art not a follower of theirdirection, neither are they followers of one another's direction.If thoufollowest their caprices, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thenthou wilt surely be among the evildoers.
146.whom We have given the Book, and they recognize it as they recognize theirsons, even though there is a party of them conceal the truth and thatwittingly.
147.The truth comes from thy Lord. then be not among the doubters.
148.Every man has his direction to which he turns. so be you forward in goodworks. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together.surely God is powerful over everything.
149.From whatsoever place thou issuest, turn thy face towards the Holy Mosque.it is the truth from thy Lord.God is not heedless of the things you do.
150.From whatsoever place thou issuest, turn thy face towards the Holy Mosque.and wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it, that the people may nothave any argument against you, excepting the evildoers of them. and fear youthem not, but fear you Me. and that I may perfect My blessing upon you, andthat haply so you may be guided.
151.as also We have sent among you, of yourselves, a Messenger, to recite Oursigns to you and to purify you, and to teach you the Book and the Wisdom, andto teach you that you knew not.
152.So remember Me, and I will remember you. and be thankful to Me. and be younot ungrateful towards Me.
153.O all you who believe, seek you help in patience and prayer. surely God iswith the patient.
154.And say not of those slain in God's way, `They are dead'. rather they areliving, but you are not aware.
155.Surely We will try you with something of fear and hunger , and diminution ofgoods and lives and fruits. yet give thou good tidings untothe patient.
156.who, when they are visited by an affliction, say, `Surely we belong to God,and to Him we return.
157.upon those rest blessings and mercy from their Lord, and those--they arethe truly guided.
158.Safa and Marwa are among the waymarks of God. so whosoever makes thePilgrimage to the House, or the Visitation, it is no fault in him tocircumambulate them. and whoso volunteers good, God is All-grateful,All-knowing.
159.Those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance that We have sent down,after We have shown them clearly in the Book--they shall be cursed by Godand the cursers.
160.save such as repent and make amends, and show clearly--towards them I shallturn. I turn, All-compassionate.
161.But those who disbelieve, and die disbelieving--upon them shall rest thecurse of God and the angels, and of men altogether.
162.therein dwelling forever. the chastisement shall not be lightened for them.no respite shall be given them.
163.Your God is One God. there is no god but He, the All-merciful,the All-compassionate.
164.Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation ofnight and day and the ship that runs in the sea with profit to men, and thewater God sends down from heaven therewith reviving the earth after it isdead and His scattering abroad in it all manner of crawling thing, and theturning about of the winds and the clouds compelled between heaven andearth--surely there are signs for a people having understanding.
165.Yet there be men who take to themselves compeers apart from God, loving themas God is loved. but those that believe love God more ardently. O if theevildoers might see, when they see the chastisement, that the poweraltogether belongs to God, and that God is terrible inchastisement.
166.when those that were followed disown their followers,and they see the chastisement, and their cords are cut asunder.
167.and those that followed say,  `O if only we might return again and disownthem, as they have disowned us!' Even so God shall show them their works.O bitter regrets for them! Never shall they issue from the Fire.
168.O men, eat of what is in the earth lawful and good. and follow not the stepsof Satan. he is a manifest foe to you.
169.He only commands you to evil and indecency, and that you should speak againstGod such things as you know not.
170.And when it is said to them, `Follow what God has sent down,' they say, `No.but we will follow such things as we found our fathers doing.'  What? And iftheir fathers had no understanding of anything, and if they werenot guided?.
171.The likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts tothat which hears nothing, save a call and a cry. deaf, dumb, blind--they donot understand.
172.O believers, eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and givethanks to God, if it be Him that you serve.
173.These things only has He forbidden you: carrion, blood, the flesh of swine,what has been hallowed to other than God. Yet whoso is constrained, notdesiring nor transgressing, no sin shall be on him. God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
174.Those who conceal what of the Book God has sent down on them, and sell it fora little price--they shall eat naught but the Fire in their bellies. Godshall not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection neither purify them.there awaits them a painful chastisement.
175.Those are they that have bought error at the price of guidance, andchastisement at the price of pardon. how patiently they shall endurethe Fire!.
176.That, because God has sent down the Book with the truth. and those that areat variance regarding the Book are in wide schism.
177.It is not piety, that you turn your faces to the East and to the West.True piety is this: to believe in God, and the Last Day, the angels, theBook, and the Prophets, to give of one's substance, however cherished, tokinsmen, and orphans, the needy, the traveller, beggars, and to ransom theslave, to perform the prayer, to pay the alms.And they who fulfil theircovenant when they have engaged in a covenant, and endure with fortitudemisfortune, hardship and peril, these are they who are true in their faith,these are the truly godfearing.
178.O believers, prescribed for you is retaliation, touching the slain.freeman for freeman, slave for slave, female for female.But if aught ispardoned a man by his brother, let the pursuing be honourable, and let thepayment be with kindliness.That is a lightening granted you by your Lord,and a mercy. and for him who commits aggression after that--for him thereawaits a painful chastisement.
179.In retaliation there is life for you, men possessed of minds. haply youwill be godfearing.
180.Prescribed for you, when any of you is visited by death, and he leaves behindsome goods, is to make testament in favour of his parents and kinsmenhonourably--an obligation on the godfearing.
181.Then if any man changes it after hearing it, the sin shall rest uponthose who change it. surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
182.But if any man fears injustice or sin from one making testament, and somakes things right between them, then sin shall not rest upon him. surely Godis All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
183.O believers, prescribedfor you is the Fast, even as it was prescribed forthose that were before you--haply you will be godfearing.
184.for days numbered. and if any of you be sick, or if he be on a journey,then a number of other days. and for those who are able to fast, a redemptionby feeding a poor man.Yet better it is for him who volunteers good,and that you should fast is better for you, if you but know.
185.the month of Ramadan, wherein the Koran was sent down to be a guidanceto the people, and as clear signs of the Guidance and the Salvation.So let those of you, who are present at the month, fast it. and if any of yoube sick, or if he be on a journey, then a number of other days. God desiresease for you, and desires not hardship for you. and that you fulfil thenumber, and magnify God that He has guided you, and haply you willbe thankful.
186.And when My servants question thee concerning Me--I am near to answerthe call of the caller, when he calls to Me. so let them respond to Me,and let them believe in Me. haply so theywill go aright.
187.Permitted to you, upon the night of the Fast, is to go in to your wives.they are a vestment for you, and you are a vestment for them. God knows thatyou have been betraying yourselves, and has turned to you and pardoned you.So now lie with them, and seek what God has prescribed for you. And eat anddrink, until the white thread shows clearly to you from the black thread atthe dawn. then complete the Fast unto the night, and do not lie with themwhile you cleave to the mosques.Those are God's bounds. keep well withinthem.So God makes clear His signs to men. haply they will be godfearing.
188.Consume not your goods between you in vanity. neither proffer itto the judges, that you may sinfully consume a portion of other men's goods,and that wittingly.
189.They will question thee concerning the new moons.Say: `They are appointedtimes for the people, and the Pilgrimage.' It is not piety to come to thehouses from the backs of them. but piety is to be godfearing. so come to thehouses bytheir doors, and fear God. haply so you will prosper.
190.And fight in the way of God with those who fight with you, but aggress not:God loves not the aggressors.
191.And slay them wherever you come upon them, and expel them from where theyexpelled you. persecution is more grievous than slaying. But fight them notby the Holy Mosque until they should fight you there. then, if they fightyou, slay them--such is the recompense of unbelievers.
192.but if they give over, surely God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
193.Fight them, till there is no persecution and the religion is God's. then ifthey give over, there shall be no enmity save for evildoers.
194.The holy month for the holy month. holy things demand retaliation.Whoso commits aggression against you, do you commit aggression against himlike as he has committed against you. and fear you God, and know that God iswith the godfearing.
195.And expend in the way of God. and cast not yourselves by your own handsinto destruction, but be good-doers. Godloves the good-doers.
196.Fulfil the Pilgrimage and the Visitation unto God. but if you are prevented,then such offering as may be feasible. And shave not your heads, till theoffering reaches its place of sacrifice.If any of you is sick, or injuredin his head, then redemption by fast, or freewill offering, or ritualsacrifice. When you are secure, then whosoever enjoys the Visitationuntil the Pilgrimage, let his offering be such as may be feasible. or if hefinds none, then a fast of three days in the Pilgrimage, and of seven whenyou return, that is ten completely. that is for him whose family are notpresent at the Holy Mosque. And fear God, and know that God is terriblein retribution.
197.The Pilgrimage is in months well-known. whoso undertakes the duty ofPilgrimage in them shall not go in to his womenfolk nor indulge inungodliness and disputing in the Pilgrimage. Whatever good you do, God knowsit. And take provision. but the best provision is godfearing,so fear you Me, men possessed of minds!.
198.It is no fault in you, that you should seek bounty from your Lord. but whenyou press on from Arafat, then remember God at the Holy Waymark, and rememberHim as He has guided you, though formerly you were gone astray.
199.Then press on from where the people press on, and pray for God's forgiveness.God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
200.And when you have performed your holy rites remember God, as you rememberyour fathers or yet more devoutly.Now some men there are who say, `Our Lord,give to us in this world'. such men shall have no part in theworld to come.
201.And others there are who say, `Our Lord, give to us in this world good,and good in the world to come, and guard us against thechastisement of the Fire.
202.those--they shall have a portion from what they have earned. and God is swiftat the reckoning .
203.And remember God during certain days numbered.If any man hastens onin two days, that is no sin in him. and if any delays, it is not a sinin him, if he be godfearing .And fear you God, and know that unto Himyou shall be mustered.
204.And some men there are whose saying upon the present world pleases thee,and such a one calls on God to witnesswhat is in his heart, yet he is most stubborn in altercation.
205.and when he turns his back, he hastens about the earth,to do corruption there and to destroy the tillage and the stock.and God loves not corruption.
206.and when it is said to him, `Fear God', vainglory seizes him in his sin.So Gehenna Hell.shall be enough for him--how evil a cradling!.
207.But other men there are that sell themselvesdesiring God's good pleasure. and God is gentle with His servants.
208.O believers enter the peace Islam  all of you,and follow not the steps of Satan he is a manifest foe to you.
209.But if you slip after the clear signs have come to you, know then that God isAll-mighty, All-wise.
210.What do they look for, but that God shall come to them in the cloud-shadows,and the angels?  The matter is determined,and unto God all matters are returned.
211.Ask the Children of Israel how many a clear sign We gave them.Whoso changes God's blessing after it has come to him,God is terrible in retribution.
212.Decked out fair to the unbelievers is the present life, and they deridethe believers. but those who were godfearing shall be above them on theResurrection Day. and God provides whosoever He will without reckoning.
213.The people were one nation. then God sent forth the Prophets,good tidings to bear and warning, and He sent down with themthe Book with the truth, that He might decide between the people touchingtheir differences. and only those who had been given it were at varianceupon it, after the clear signs had come to them, being insolentone to another. then God guided those who believed to the truth,touching which they were at variance, by His leave. and God guideswhomsoever He will to a straight path.
214.Or did you suppose you should enter Paradisewithout there had come upon you the like of those who passed away before you?They were afflicted by misery and hardship and were so convulsed,that the Messenger and those who believed with him said,`When comes God's help?'  Ah, but surely God's help is nigh.
215.They will question thee concerning what they should expend.Say:`Whatsoever good you expend is for parents and kinsmen,orphans, the needy, and the traveller.and whatever good you may do, God has knowledge of it.
216.Prescribed for you is fighting, though it be hateful to you.Yet it may happen that you will hate a thingwhich is better for you. and it may happen that youwill love a thing which is worse for you. God knows, and you know not.
217.They will question thee concerning the holy month, and fighting in it.Say: `Fighting in it is a heinous thing,but to bar from God's way, and disbelief in Him,and the Holy Mosque, and to expel its people from it--that is more heinous in God's sight.and persecution is more heinous that slaying.'They will not cease to fight with you, till they turn you from your religion,if they are able. and whosoever of you turns from his religion,and dies disbelieving--their works have failed in this world and the next.those are the inhabitants of the Fire. therein they shall dwell forever.
218.But the believers, and those who emigrateand struggle in God's way--those have hope ofGod's compassion. and God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
219.They will question thee concerning wine, and arrow-shuffling. Say:`In both is heinous sin, and uses for men, but the sin in them is moreheinous than the usefulness.' They will question thee concerning what theyshould expend.Say: `The abundance.'  So God makes clear His signs to you.haply you will reflect.
220.in this world, and the world to come.They will question thee concerning theorphans. Say: `Go set their affairs aright is good. And if you intermixwith them, they are your brothers.God knows well him who works corruptionfrom him who sets aright. and had He willed He would have harassed you.Surely God is All-mighty, All-wise.
221.Do not marry idolatresses, until they believe. a believing slavegirlis better than an idolatress, though you may admire her.And do not marryidolaters, until they believe. A believing slave is better than an idolater,though you may admire him. Those call unto the Fire. and God calls untoParadise, and pardon, by His leave, and He makes clear His signs to thepeople. haply they will remember.
222.They will question thee concerning the monthly course.Say: `It is hurt.so go apart from women during the monthly course, and do not approach themtill they are clean.When they have cleansed themselves, then come unto themas God has commanded you.'  Truly, God loves those who repent, and He lovesthose who cleanse themselves.
223.Your women are a tillage for you. so come unto your tillage as you wish,and forward for your souls. and fear God, and know thatyou shall meet Him.Give thou good tidings to the believers.
224.Do not make God a hindrance, through your oaths,to being pious and godfearing, and putting things right between men.Surely God is All-hearing,All-knowing.
225.God will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths. but He will take youto task for what your hearts have earned. and God is All-forgiving,All-clement.
226.For those who forswear their women a wait of four months. if they revert,God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
227.but if they resolve on divorce, surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
228.Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods.and it is not lawful for them to hide what God has created in their wombs.if they believe in God and the Last Day.In such time their mateshave better right to restore them, if they desire to set things right.Women have such honourable rights as obligations, buttheir men have a degree above them. God is All-mighty, All-wise.
229.Divorce is twice. then honourable retention or setting free kindly.It is not lawful for you to take of what you have given them unless thecouple fear they may not maintain God's bounds. if you fear they may notmaintain God's bounds, it is no fault in themfor her to redeem herself.Those are God's bounds. do not transgress them. Whosoever transgresses thebounds of God--those are the evildoers.
230.If he divorces her finally, she shall not be lawful to him after that, untilshe marries another husband. If he divorces her, then it is no fault in themto return to each other, if they suppose that they will maintain God'sbounds.Those are God's bounds. He makes them clear unto a peoplethat have knowledge.
231.When you divorce women, and they have reached their term,then retain them honourably or set them free honourably.do not retain them by force, to transgress. whoever does thathas wronged himself. Take not God's signs in mockery, and remember God'sblessing upon you, and the book and the Wisdom He has sent down on you,to admonish you. And fear God, and know that God has knowledge ofeverything.
232.When you divorce women, and they have reached their term, do not debar themfrom marrying their husbands, when they have agreed together honourably.That is anadmonition for whoso of you believes in God and the Last Day.that is cleaner and purer for you. God knows, and you know not.
233.Mothers shall suckle their children two years completely, for such as desireto fulfil the suckling. It is for the father to provide them and clothe themhonourably. No soul is charged save to its capacity. a mother shall not bepressed for her child, neither a father for his child.The heir has a like duty. But if the couple desire by mutual consent andconsultation to wean, then it is no fault in them. And if you desire to seeknursing for your children, it is no fault in you provide you hand over whatyou have given honourably. and fear God, and know that God seesthe things you do.
234.And those of you who die, leaving wives, they shall wait by themselves forfour months and ten nights. when they have reached their term then it is nofault in you what they may do with themselves honourably. God is aware ofthe things you do.
235.There is no fault in you touching the proposal to women you offer, or hide inyour hearts. God knows that you will be mindful of them. but do not make trothwith them secretly without you speak honourable words.And do not resolve on the knot of marriage until the book has reached itsterm. and know that God knows what is in your hearts, so be fearful of Him.and know that God is All-forgiving, All-clement.
236.There is no fault in you, if you divorce women while as yet you have nottouched them nor appointed any marriage-portion for them. yet make provisionfor them, the affluent man according to his means, and according to his meansthe needy man, honourably--an obligation on the good-doers.
237.And if you divorce them before you have touched them, and you have alreadyappointed for them a marriage-portion, then one-half of what you haveappointed, unless it be they make remission, or he makes remissionin whose hand is the knot of marriage. yet that you should remit is nearerto godfearing.Forget not to be bountiful one towards another. Surely Godsees the things you do.
238.Be you watchful over the prayers, and the middle prayer. and do you standobedient to God.
239.And if you are in fear, then afoot or mounted. but when you are secure, thenremember God, as He taught you the things that you knew not.
240.And those of you who die, leaving wives, let them make testament for theirwives, provision for a year without expulsion. but if they go forth, there isno fault in you what they may do with themselves honourably.God is All-mighty, All-wise.
241.There shall be for divorced women provision honourable--an obligationon the godfearing.
242.So God makes clear His signs for you. haply you will understand.
243.Hast thou not regarded those who went forth from their habitations in theirthousands fearful of death?  God said to them, `Die!' Then He gave them life.Truly God is bounteous to the people, but most of the peopleare not thankful.
244.So fight in God's way, and know that God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
245.Who is he that will lend God a good loan, and He will multiply it for himmanifold?  God grasps, and outspreads. and unto Him you shallbe returned.
246.Hast thou not regarded the Council of the Children of Israel, after Moses,when they said to a Prophet of theirs, `Raise up for us a king, and we willfight in God's way.'  He said, `Might it be that, if fighting is prescribedfor you, you will not fight?'  They said, `Why should we not fight in God'sway, who have been expelled from our habitations and our children?' Yet whenfighting was prescribed for them, they turned their backs except a few ofthem. and God has knowledge of the evildoers.
247.Then their Prophet said to them, `Verily God has raised up Saul for you asking.' They said, `How should he be king over us who have better right thanhe to kingship, seeing he has not been given amplitude of wealth?' He said,`God has chosen him over you, and has increased him broadly in knowledge andbody. God gives the kingship to whom He will. and God isAll-embracing, All-knowing.
248.And their Prophet said to them, `The sign of his kingship is that the Ark willcome to you, in it a Shechina sakina-symbol/security.from your Lord, and aremnant of what the folk of Moses and Aaron's folk left behind, the angelsbearing it.Surely in that shall be a sign for you, if you are believers.
249.And when Saul went forth with the hosts he said, `God will try you with ariver. whosoever drinks of it is not of me, and whoso tastes it not, he is ofme, saving him whom scoops up with his hand.'  But they drank of it, except afew of them. and when he crossed it, and those who believed with him, theysaid, `We have no power today against Goliath and his hosts.'Said those who reckoned they should meet God, `How often a little company hasovercome a numerous company, by God's leave!  And God is with the patient.
250.So, when they went forth against Goliath and his hosts, they said, `Our Lord,pour out upon us patience, and make firm our feet, and give us aid against thepeople of the unbelievers!.
251.And they routed them, by the leaveof God, and David slew Goliath. and Godgave him the kingship, and Wisdom, and He taught him such as He willed.HadGod not driven back the people, some by the means of others, the earth hadsurely corrupted. but God is bounteous unto all beings.
252.These are the signs of God We recite to thee in truth,and assuredly thou art of the number of the Envoys.
253.And those Messengers, some We have preferred above others. some there areto whom God spoke, and some He raised in rank. And We gave Jesus son of Marythe clear signs, and confirmed him with the Holy Spirit. And had God willed,those who came after him would not have fought one against the otherafter the clear signs had come to them. but they fell into variance, and someof them believed, and some disbelieved. and had God willed they would not havefought one against the other. but God does whatsoever He desires.
254.O believers, expend of that wherewith We have provided you, before there comesa day wherein shall be neither traffick, nor friendship, nor intercession. andthe unbelievers--they are the evildoers.
255.God there is no god but He, the Living, the Everlasting.Slumber seizes Him not, neither sleep. to Him belongs all that is in theheavens and the earth. Who is there that shall intercede with Him save byHis leave?  He knows what lies before them and what is after them,and they comprehend not anything of His knowledge save such as He wills.His Throne comprises the heavens and earth. the preserving of them oppressesHim not. He is the All-high, the All-glorious.
256.No compulsion is there in religion.Rectitude has become clear from error.So whosoever disbelieves in idols and believes in God, has laid hold ofthe most firm handle, unbreaking. God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
257.God is the Protector of the believers. He brings them forth from the shadowsinto the light. And the unbelievers--their protectors are idols, that bringthem forth from the light into the shadows. those are the inhabitants of theFire, therein dwelling forever.
258.Hast thou not regarded him who disputed with Abraham, concerning his Lord,that God had given him the kingship?  When Abraham said, `My Lord is He whogives life, and makes to die,' he said, `I give life, and make to die.' SaidAbraham, `God brings the sun from the east. so bring thou it from the west.'Then the unbeliever was confounded. God guides not thepeople of the evildoers.
259.Or such as he who passed by a city that was fallen down upon its turrets.he said, `How shall God give life to this now it is dead?'  So God made himdie a hundred years, then He raised him up, saying, `How long hast thoutarried?'  He said, `I have tarried a day, or part of a day.' Said He, `Nay.thou hast tarried a hundred years. Look at thy food and drink--it has notspoiled. and look at thy ass.So We would make thee a sign for the people.Andlook at the bones, how We shall set them up, and then clothe them with flesh.'So, when it was made clear to him, he said, `I know that God is powerfulover everything.
260.And when Abraham said, `My Lord, show me how Thou wilt give life to the dead,'He said, `Why, dost thou not believe?' `Yes,' he said, `but that my heart maybe at rest.'  Said He, `Take four birds, and twist them to thee, then set apart of them on every hill, then summon them, and they will come to theerunning. And do thou know that God is All-mighty, All-wise.
261.The likeness of those who expend their wealth in the way of God is as thelikeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundredgrains. So God multiplies unto whom He will.God is All-embracing, All-clement.
262.Those who expend their wealth in the way of God then follow not up what theyhave expended with reproach and injury, their wage is with their Lord,and no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
263.Honourable words, and forgiveness, are better than a freewill offeringfollowed by injury. and God is All-sufficient, All-clement.
264.O believers, void not your freewill offerings with reproach and injury, as onewho expends of his substance to show off to men and believes not in God andthe Last Day.
265.The likeness of him is as the likeness of a smooth rock on which is soil,and a torrent smites it, and leaves it barren. They have no power overanything that they have earned. God guides not the people of the unbelievers.But the likeness of those who expend their wealth, seeking God's goodpleasure, and to confirm themselves, is as the likenessof a garden upon a hill. a torrent smites it and it yields its producetwofold. if no torrent smites it, yet dew.and God sees the things you do.
266.Would any of you wish to have a garden of palms and vines, with rivers flowingbeneath it, and all manner of fruit there for him, then old age smites him,and he has seed, but weaklings, then a whirlwind with fire smites it, and itis consumed?  So God makes clear the signs to you. haply you will reflect.
267.O believers, expend of the good things you have earned, and of that Wehave produced for you from the earth, and intend not the corrupt of itforyour expending. for you would never take it yourselves, except you closed aneye on it. and know that God is All-sufficient, All-laudable.
268.Satan promises you poverty, and bids you unto indecency. but God promises youHis pardon and His bounty. and God is All-embracing, All-knowing.
269.He gives the Wisdom to whomsoever He will, and whoso is given the Wisdom, hasbeen given much good. yet none remembers but men possessed of minds.
270.And whatever expenditure you expend, and whatever vow you vow, surely Godknows it. No helpers have the evildoers.
271.If you publish your freewill offerings, it is excellent. but if you concealthem, and give them to the poor, that is better for you, and willacquit you of your evil deeds. God is aware of the things you do.
272.Thou art not responsible for guiding them. but God guides whomsoever He will.And whatever good you expend is for yourselves, for then you are expending,being desirous only of God's Face. and whatever good you expend shall berepaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
273.it being for the poor who are restrained in the way of God, and are unableto journey in the land. the ignorant man supposes them rich because of theirabstinence, but thou shalt know them by their mark--they do not beg of menimportunately. And whatever good you expend, surely God has knowledge of it.
274.Those who expend their wealth night and day, secretly and in public, theirwage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neither shallthey sorrow.
275.Those who devout usury shall not rise again except as he rises, whom Satan ofthe touch prostrates. that is because they say,  `Trafficking is like usury.'God has permitted trafficking, and forbidden usury. Whosoever receives anadmonition from his Lord and gives over, he shall have his past gains, and hisaffair is committed to God. but whosoever reverts--those are the inhabitantsof the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
276.God blots out usury, but freewill offerings He augments with interest.Godloves not any guilty ingrate.
277.Those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, and perform the prayer, andpay the alms--their wage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be onthem neither shall they sorrow.
278.O believers, fear you God. and give up the usury that is outstanding, ifyou are believers.
279.But if you do not, then take notice that God shall war with you, and HisMessenger. yet if you repent, you shall have your principal, unwronging andunwronged.
280.And if any man should be in difficulties, let him have respite till things areeasier. but that you should give freewill offerings is better for you,did you but know.
281.And fear a day wherein you shall be returned to God, and every soul shall bepaid in full what it has earned. and they shall not be wronged.
282.O believers, when you contract a debt one upon another for a stated term,write it down, and let a writer write it down between you justly,and let not any writer refuse to write it down, as God has taught him.so let him write, andlet the debtor dictate, and let him fear God his Lordand not diminish aught of it.And if the debtor be a fool, or weak, or unableto dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate justly.And call in towitness two witnesses, men. or if the two be not men, then one man and twowomen, such witnesses as you approve of, that if one of the two women errsthe other will remind her. and let the witnesses not refuse, whenever they aresummoned.And be not loth to write it down, whether it be small or great, withits term. that is more equitable in God's sight,more upright for testimony, and likelier that you will no be in doubt.Unlessit be merchandise present that you give and take between you. then it shall beno fault in you if you do not write it down.And take witnesseswhen you are trafficking one with another.And let not either writer orwitness be pressed. or if you do, that is ungodliness in you. And fear God.God teaches you, and God has knowledge of everything.
283.And if you are upon a journey, and youdo not find a writer, then a pledge inhand. But if one of you trusts another, let him who is trusted deliver histrust, and let him fear God his Lord. And do not conceal the testimony.whoso conceals it, his heart is sinful. and God has knowledge of the thingsyou do.
284.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and earth. Whether you publish whatis in your hearts or hide it, God shall make reckoning with you for it .Hewill forgive whom He will, and chastise whom He will. God is powerful overeverything.
285.The Messenger believes in what was sent down to him from his Lord, and thebelievers. each one believes in God and His angels, and in His Books and HisMessengers. we make no division between any one of His Messengers.They say,`We hear, and obey.Our Lord, grant us Thy forgiveness. unto Thee is thehomecoming.
286.God charges no soul save to its capacity. standing to its account is what ithas earned, and against its account what it has merited.Our Lord, take us notto task if we forget, or make mistake.Our Lord, charge us not with a loadsuch as Thou didst lay upon those before us.Our Lord, do Thou not burden usbeyond what we have the strength to bear.And pardon us, and forgive us,and have mercy on us. Thou art our Protector. And help us against the peopleof the unbelievers.