1.Kaf Ha Ya Ain Sad.
2.The mention of thy Lord's mercy unto His servant Zachariah.
3.when he called upon his Lord secretly.
4.saying, `O my Lord, behold the bones within me are feeble and my head is allaflame with hoariness.And in calling on Thee, my Lord, I have never beenhitherto unprosperous.
5.And now I fear my kinsfolk after I am gone; and my wife is barren.So giveme, from Thee, a kinsman.
6.who shall be my inheritor and the inheritor of the House of Jacob; and makehim, my Lord, well-pleasing.
7.`O Zachariah, we give thee good tidings of a boy, whose name is John. Nonamesake have We given him aforetime.
8.He said, `O my Lord, how shall I have a son, seeing my wife is barren, and Ihave attained to the declining of old age?.
9.Said He, `So it shall be; thy Lord says, "Easy is that for Me, seeing that Icreated thee aforetime, when thou wast nothing.
10.He said, `Lord, appoint to me some sign.' Said He, `Thy sign is that thoushalt not speak to men, though being without fault,three nights.
11.So he came forth unto his people from the Sanctuary, then he made signal tothem, `Give you glory at dawn and evening.
12.John, take the Book forcefully'; and We gave him judgment, yet alittle child.
13.and a tenderness from Us, and purity; and he was godfearing.
14.andcherishing his parents, not arrogant, rebellious.
15.Peace be upon him, the day he was born, and the day he dies , and the day heis raised up alive!.
16.And mention in the Book Mary when she withdrew from her peopleto an eastern place.
17.and she took a veil apart from them; then We sent unto her Our Spiritthat presented himself to her a man without fault.
18.She said, `I take refuge in the All-merciful from thee! If thoufearest God.
19.He said, `I am but a messenger come from thy Lord, to give theea boy most pure.
20.She said, `How shall I have a son whom no mortal has touched, neitherhave I been unchaste?
21.He said, `Even so thy Lord has said: "Easy is that for Me; and that We mayappoint him a sign unto men and a mercy from Us; it is a thing decreed.
22.So she conceived him, and withdrew with him to a distant place.
23.And the birthpangs surprised her by the trunk of the palm-tree.She said,`Would I had died ere this, and become a thing forgotten!.
24.But the one that was below her called to her, `Nay, do not sorrow; see, thyLord has set below thee a rivulet.
25.Shake also to thee the palm-trunk, and there shall come tumbling upon theedates fresh and ripe.
26.Eat therefore, and drink, and be comforted; and if thou shouldst see anymortal, say, "I have vowed to the All-merciful a fast, and today I will notspeak to any man.
27.Then she brought the child to her folk carrying him; and they said,`Mary, thou hast surely committed a monstrous thing.
28.Sister of Aaron, thy father was not a wicked man, nor was thy mothera woman unchaste.
29.Mary pointed to the child then; but they said, `How shall we speak to one whois still in the cradle, a little child?.
30.He said, `Lo I am God's servant; God has given me the Book, andmade me a Prophet.
31.Blessed He has made me, wherever I may be; and He has enjoined me to pray,and to give the alms, so long as I live.
32.and likewise to cherish my mother; He has not made me arrogant,unprosperous.
33.Peace be upon me, the day I was born , and the day I die, and the day I amraised up alive.
34.That is Jesus, son of Mary, in word of truth, concerning whichthey are doubting.
35.It is not for God to take a son unto Him.Glory be to Him! When He decreesa thing, He but says to it Be, and it is.
36.Surely God is my Lord, and your Lord; so serve you Him.This isa straight path.
37.But the parties have fallen into variance among themselves; then woe to thosewho disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day.
38.How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us! But theevildoers even today are in error manifest.
39.Warn thou them of the day of anguish, when the matter shall be determined,and they yet heedless and unbelieving.
40.Surely We shall inherit the earth and all that are upon it, and unto Us theyshall be returned.
41.And mention in the Book Abraham; surely he was a true man, a Prophet.
42.When he said to his father, `Father, why worshippest thou that which neitherhears nor sees, nor avails thee anything?.
43.Father, there has come to me knowledge such as came not to thee; so followme, and I will guide thee on a level path.
44.Father, serve not Satan; surely Satan is a rebel against the All-merciful.
45.Father, I fear that some chastisement from the All-merciful will smite thee,so that thou becomest a friend to Satan.
46.Said he, `What, art thou shrinking from my gods, Abraham? Surely, if thougivest not over, I shall stone thee; so forsake me now for some while.
47.He said, `Peace be upon thee! I will ask my Lord to forgive thee; surely Heis ever gracious to me.
48.Now I will go apart from you and that you call upon, apart from God; I willcall upon my Lord, and haply I shall not be, in calling upon my Lord,unprosperous.
49.So, when he went apart from them and that they were serving, apart from God,We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and each We made a Prophet.
50.and We gave them of Our mercy, and We appointed unto them a tongue oftruthfulness, sublime.
51.And mention in the Book Moses; he was devoted, and he was a Messenger, aProphet.
52.We called to him from the right side of the Mount, and We brought him near incommunion.
53.And We gave him his brother Aaron , of Our mercy, a Prophet.
54.And mention in the Book Ishmael ; he was true to his promise, and he wasa Messenger, a Prophet.
55.He bade his people to pray and to give the alms, and he was pleasing to hisLord.
56.And mention in the Book Idris; he was a true man, a Prophet.
57.We raised him up to a high place.
58.SUJDAH AYA @These are they whom God has blessed among the Prophets of theseed of Adam, and of those We bore with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham andIsrael, and of those We guided and chose.When the signs of the All-mercifulwere recited to them, they fell down prostrate, weeping.
59.Then there succeeded after them a succession who wasted the prayer, andfollowed lusts; so they shall encounter error.
60.Save him who repents, and believes, and does a righteous deed; those--theyshall enter Paradise, and they shall notbe wronged anything.
61.Gardens of Eden that the All-merciful promised His servants in the Unseen;His promise is ever performed.
62.There they shall hear no idle talk, but only `Peace.' There they shall havetheir provision at dawn and evening.
63.That is Paradise which We shall give as an inheritance to those of Ourservants who are godfearing.
64.We come not down, save at the commandment of thy Lord.To Him belongs allthat is before us, and all that is behind us, and all between that.
65.And thy Lord is never forgetful, Lord He of the heavens and earth and allthat is between them.So serve Him, and be thou patient in His service;knowest thou any that can be named with His Name?.
66.Man says, `What, when I am dead shall I then be brought forth alive?.
67.Will not man remember that We created him aforetime, when he was nothing?.
68.Now, by thy Lord, We shall surely muster them, and the Satans, then We shallparade them about Gehenna Hell hobbling on their kness.
69.Then We shall pluck forth from every party whichever of them was the mosthardened in disdain of the All-merciful.
70.then We shall know very well those most deserving to burn there.
71.Not one of you there is, but he shall go down to it; that for thy Lordis a thing decreed, determined.
72.Then We shall deliver those that were godfearing; and the evildoers We shallleave there, hobbling on their knees.
73.When Our signs are recited to them as clear signs, the unbelievers say to thebelievers, `Which of the two parties is better in station, fairerin assembly?.
74.And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were fairer infurnishing and outward show.
75.Say: `Whosoever is in error, let the All-merciful prolong his term for him!Till, when they see that they were threatened, whether the chastisement, orthe Hour, then they shall surely know who is worse in place, and who isweaker in hosts.
76.And God shall increase those who were guided in guidance; and the abidingthing, the deeds of righteousness, are better with thy Lord in reward, andbetter in return.
77.Hast thou seen him who disbelieves in Our signs and says,' Assuredly I shallbe given wealth and children?.
78.What, has he observed the unseen, or taken a covenant with the All-merciful?.
79.No, indeed! We shall assuredly write down all that he says, and We shallprolong for him the chastisement.
80.and We shall inherit from him that he says, and he shall come toUs alone.
81.And they have taken to them other gods apart from God, that they might be forthem a might.
82.No, indeed! They shall deny their service, and they shall be against thempitted.
83.Hast thou not seen how We sent the Satans against the unbelievers, toprick them?.
84.So hasten thou not against them; We are only numbering for them a number.
85.On the day that We shall muster the godfearing to the All-mercifulwith pomp.
86.and drive the evildoers into Gehenna Hell herding.
87.having no power of intercession, save those who have taken with theAll-merciful covenant.
88.And they say, `The All-merciful has taken unto Himself a son.
89.You have indeed advanced something hideous.
90.The heavens are wellnigh rent of it and the earth split asunder, and themountains wellnigh fall down crashing.
91.for that they have attributed to the All-merciful a son.
92.and it behoves not the All-merciful to take a son.
93.None is there in the heavens and earth but he comes to the All-merciful as aservant.
94.He has indeed counted them, and He has numbered them exactly.
95.Every one of them shall come to Him upon the Day of Resurrection,all alone.
96.Surely those who believe and do deeds of righteousness--unto them theAll-merciful shall assign love.
97.Now We have made it easy by thy tongue that thou mayest bear good tidingsthereby to the godfearing, and warn a people stubborn.
98.And how many a generation We destroyed before them! Dost thou perceive somuch as one of them, or hear of them a whisper?.