%1% <1,1>
1.In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
2.Praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being,
3.the All-merciful, the All-compassionate,
4.the Master of the Day of Doom.
5.Thee only we serve; to Thee alone we pray for succour.
6.Guide us in the straight path,
7.the path of those whom Thou hast blessed, not of those against whomThou art wrathful, nor of those who are astray.
%2% <2,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.That is the Book, wherein is no doubt, a guidance to the godfearing
3.who believe in the Unseen, and perform the prayer, and expend of thatWe have provided them;
4.who believe in what has been sent down to thee and what has been sent downbefore thee, and have faith in the Hereafter;
5.those are upon guidance from their Lord,those are the ones who prosper.
%3% 6.As for the unbelievers, alike it is to them whether thou hast warned themor hast not warned them, they do not believe.
7.God has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing,and ontheir eyes is a covering, and there awaits them a mighty chastisement.
8.And some men there are who say, `We believe in God and the Last Day';but they are not believers.
9.They would trick God and the believers, and only themselves they deceive,and they are not aware.
10.In their hearts is a sickness, and God has incresed their sickness,and there awaits them a painful chastisementfor that they have cried lies.
11.When it is said to them, `Do not corruption in the land',they say, `We are only ones that put things right.'
12.Truly, they are the workers of corruption but they are not aware.
13.When it is said to them, `Believe as the people believe',they say, `Shall we believe, as fools believe?'Truly, they are the foolish ones, but they do not know.
14.When they meet those who believe, they say, `We believe';but when they go privily to their Satans, they say,`We are with you; we were only mocking.'
15.God shall mock them, and shall lead them onblindly wandering in their insolence.
16.Those are they that have bought error at the price of guidance,and their commerce has not profited them,and they are not right-guided.
%4% 17.The likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled a fire,and when it lit all about him God took away their light,and left them in darkness unseeing,
18.deaf, dumb, blind--so they shall not return;
19.or as a cloudburst out of heaven in which is darkness, and thunder,and lightning--they put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps,fearful of death; and God encompasses the unbelievers;
20.the lightning wellnigh snatches away their sight;whensoever it gives them light, they walk in it,and when the darkness is over them, they halt;had God willed, He would have taken away their hearing and their sight.Truly, God is powerful over everything.
21.O you men, serve your Lord Who created you, and those that were before you;haply so you will be godfearing;
22.who assigned to you the earth for a couch, and heaven for an edifice,and sent down out of heaven water, wherewith He brought forth fruitsfor your provision; so set not up compeers to God wittingly.
23.And if you are in doubt concerning that We have sent down on Our servant,then bring a sura like it, and call your witnesses, apart from God,if you are truthful.
24.And if you do not--and you will not--then fear the Fire,whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for unbelievers.
%5% 25.Give thou good tidings to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness,that for them await gardens underneath which rivers flow;whensoever they are provided with fruits therefromthey shall say, `This is that wherewithal we were provided before';that they shall be given in perfect semblance; and the for them shall bespouses purified; therein they shall dwell forever.
26.God is not ashamed to strike a similitude even of a gnat, or aught above it.As for the believers, they know it is the truth from their Lord;but as for unbelievers, they say, `What did God desire by thisfor a similitude?' Thereby He leads many astray, and thereby He guides many;and thereby He leads none astray save the ungodly
27.such as break the covenant of God after its solemn binding, and such as cutwhat God has commanded should be joined,and such as do corruption in the land--they shall be the losers.
28.How do you disbelieve in God, seeing you were deadand He gave you life, then He shall make you dead,then He shall give you life, then unto Him you shall be returned?
29.It is He who created for you all that isin the earth, then He lifted Himself to heavenand levelled them seven heavens; and He has knowledge of everything.
%6% 30.And when thy Lord said to the angels, `I am setting in the earth a viceroy.'They said, `What, wilt Thou set therein one who will do corruption there,and shed blood, while We proclaim Thy praise and call Thee Holy?'He said, `Assuredly I know that you know not.'
31.And He taught Adam the names, all of them; then He presented themunto the angels and said, `Now tell Me the names of these,if you speak truly.'
32.They said, `Glory be to Thee! We know not savewhat Thou hast taught us.Surely Thou art the All-knowing, the All-wise.'
33.He said, `Adam tell them their names.'And when he had told them their names He said, `Did I not tell you I knowthe unseen things of the heavens and earth?And I know what things you reveal, and what you were hiding.'
34.And when We said to the angels, `Bow yourselves to Adam'; so they bowedthemselves, save Iblis; he refused, and waxed proud, and so he becameone of the unbelievers.
35.And We said, Adam, dwell thou, and thy wife, in the Garden,and eat thereof easefully where you desire; but draw not nigh this tree,lest you be evildoers.'
36.Then Satan caused them to slip therefrom and brought them out of thatthey were in; and We said, `Get you all down, each of you an enemy of each;and in the earth a sojourn shall be yours, and enjoyment for a time.'
37.Thereafter Adam received certain words from his Lord, and He turned towardshim; truly He turns, and is All-compassionate.
%7% 38.We said, `Get you down out of it, all together; yet there shall come to youguidance from Me, and whosoever follows My guidance,no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.As for the unbelievers who cry lies to Our signs,
39.those shall be the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.'
40.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you,and fulfil My covenant and I shall fulfil your covenant; and haveawe of Me.
41.And believe in that I have sent down, confirming that which is with you,and be not the first to disbelieve in it.And sell not My signsfor a little price; and fear you Me.
42.And do not confound the truth with vanity, and do not conceal the truthwittingly.
43.And perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and bow with those that bow.
44.Will you bid others to piety, and forget yourselves while you recite the Book?Do you not understand?
45.Seek you help in patience and prayer, for grievous it is,save to the humble
46.who reckon that they shall meet their Lord and that unto Him they arereturning.
47.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you, and that Ihave preferred you above all beings;
48.and beware of a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction,and no intercession shall be accepted from it, nor any counterpoisebe taken, neither shall they be helped.
%8% 49.And when We delivered you from the folk of Pharaoh who were visiting you withevil chastisement, slaughtering your sons, and sparing your women; and in thatwas a grievous trial from your Lord.
50.And when We divided for you the sea and delivered you, and drowned Pharaoh'sfolk while you were beholding.
51.And when We appointed with Moses forty nights then you took to yourselves theCalf after him and you were evildoers;
52.then We pardoned you after that, that haply you should be thankful.
53.And when We gave to Moses the Book and the Salvation, that haplyyou should be guided.
54.And when Moses said to his people, `My people, you have done wrong againstyourselves by your taking the Calf; now turn to your Creatorand slay one another.That will be better for you in your Creator's sight,and He will turn to you; truly He turns, and is All-compassionate.'
55.And when you said, `Moses, we will not believe thee till we see God openly';and the thunderbolt took you while you were beholding.
56.Then We raised you up after you were dead, that haplyyou should be thankful.
57.And We outspread the cloud to overshadow you, and We sent down manna andquails upon you: `Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you.'And they worked no wrong upon Us, but themselves they wronged.
%9% 58.And when We said, `Enter this township, and eat easefully of it wherever youwill, and enter in at the gate, prostrating, and say, Unburdening; We willforgive you your transgressions, and increase the good-doers.'
59.Then the evildoers substituted a saying other than that which had beensaid to them; so We sent down upon the evildoers wrath out of heavenfor their ungodliness.
60.And when Moses sought water for his people, so We said, `Strike with thystaff the rock'; and there gushed forth from it twelve fountains; all thepeople knew now their drinking-place.`Eat and drink of God's providing, andmischief not in the earth, doing corruption.'
61.And when you said, `Moses, we will not endure one sort of food; pray to theyLord for us, that He may bring forth for us of that the earth produces--greenherbs, cucumbers, corn, lentils, onions.'  He said, `Would you have inexchange what is meaner for what is better?  Get you down to Egypt; you shallhave there that you demanded.' And abasement and poverty were pitched uponthem, and they were laden with the burden of God's anger; that, because theyhad disbelieved the signs of God and slain the Prophets unrightfully; that,because they disobeyed, and were transgressors.
%10% 62.Surely they that believe, and those of Jewry, and the Christians, and thoseSabaeans, whoso believes in God and the Last Day, and works righteousness--their wage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neithershall they sorrow.
63.And when We tookcompact with you, and raised above you the Mount: `Takeforcefully what We have given you, and remember what is in it; haply youshall be godfearing.'
64.Then you turned away thereafter, and but for the bounty and mercy of Godtowards you, you had been of the losers.
65.And well you know there were those among you that transgressed the Sabbath,and We said to them, `Be you apes, miserably slinking!'
66.And We made it a punishment exemplary for all the former times and for thelatter, and an admonition to such as are godfearing.
67.And when Moses said to his people, `God commands you to sacrifice a cow.'They said, `Dost thou take us in mockery?' He said, `I take refuge with God,lest I should be one of the ignorant.
68.`They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He may make clear to us what shemay be.' He said, `He says she is a cow neither old, nor virgin, middlingbetween the two; so do that you are bidden.'
69.They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He make clear to us what her colourmay be.' He said, `He says she shall be a golden cow, bright her colour,gladdening the beholders.
%11% 70.They said, `Pray to thy Lord for us, that He make clear to us what she may be;cows are much alike to us; and, if God will, we shall thenbe guided.'
71.He said, `He says she shall be a cow not broken to plough the earth or towater the tillage, one kept secure, with no blemish on her.' They said,`Now thou hast brought the truth'; and therefore they sacrificed her, a thingthey had scarcely done.
72.And when you killed a living soul, and disputed thereon--and God disclosedwhat you were hiding--
73.so We said, `Smite him with part of it,; even so God brings to life the dead,and He shows you His signs, that haply you may have understanding.
74.Then your hearts became hardened thereafter and are like stones, or even yetharder; for there are stones from which rivers come gushing, and others split,so that water issues from them, and others crash down in the fear of God.AndGod is not heedless of the things you do.
75.Are you then so eager that they should believe you, seeing there is a partyof them that heard God's word, and then tampered with it, and that after theyhad comprehended it, wittingly?
76.And when they meet those who believe, they say `We believe'; and when they goprivily one to another, they say, `Do you speak to them of what God hasrevealed to you, that they may thereby dispute with you before your Lord?Have you no understanding?'
%12% 77.Know they not that God knows what they keep secret and what they publish?
78.And some there are of them that are common folk not knowing the Book,but only fancies and mere conjectures.
79.So woe to those who write the Book with their hands, then say, `This is fromGod,' that they may sell it for a little price; so woe to them for what theirhands have written, and woe to them for their earnings.
80.And they say, `The Fire shall not touch us save a number of days.'Say: `Have you taken with God a covenant?  God will not fail in Hiscovenant; or say you things against God of which youknow nothing?
81.Not so; whoso earns evil, and is encompassed by his transgression--those arethe inhabitants of the Fire; there they shall dwell forever.
82.And those that believe, and do deeds of righteousness--those are theinhabitants of Paradise; there they shall dwell forever.'
83.And when We took compact with the Children of Israel: `You shall not serveany save God; and to be good to parents, and the near kinsman, and toorphans, and to the needy; and speak good to men, and perform the prayer, andpay the alms.' Then you turned away, all but a few of you, swerving aside.
%13% 84.And when We took compact with you: `You shall not shed your own blood,neither expel your own from your habitations'; then you confirmed it andyourselves bore witness.
85.Then there you are killing one another, and expelling a party of youfrom their habitations, conspiring against them in sin and enmity; and ifthey come to you as captives, you ransom them; yet their expulsionwas forbidden you.What, do you believe in part of the Book, anddisbelievein part?  What shall be the recompense of those of you who do that,but degradation in the present life, and on the Day of Resurrection to bereturned unto the most terrible of chastisement?  And God is not heedless ofthe things you do.
86.Those who have purchased the present life at the price of the world to come--for them the chastisement shall not be lightened, neither shall theybe helped.
87.And We gave to Moses the Book, and after him sent succeeding Messengers;and We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear signs, and confirmed himwith the Holy Spirit; and whensoever there came to you a Messengerwith that your souls had not desire for, did you become arrogant, and somecry lies to, and some slay?
88.And they say, `Our hearts are uncircumcised.' Nay, but God has cursed themfor their unbelief; little will they believe.
%14% 89.When there came to them a Book from God, confirming what was with them--and they aforetimes prayed for victory over the unbelievers--when there cameto them that they recognized, they disbelieved in it;and the curse of God is on the unbelievers.
90.Evil is the thing they have sold themselves for, disbelieving in that whichGod sent down, grudging that God should send down of His bounty on whomsoeverHe will of His servants, and they were laden with anger upon anger;and for unbelievers awaits a humbling chastisement.
91.And when they were told, `Believe in that God has sent down,' they said,`We believe in what was sent down on us'; and they disbelieve in what isbeyond that, yet it is the truth confirming what is with them.Say: `Why then were you slaying the Prophets of God in former time,if you were believers?'
92.And Moses came to you with the clear signs, then you took to yourselvesthe Calf after him and you were evildoers.
93.And when We took compact with you, and raised over you the Mount:`Take forcefully what We have given you and give ear.' They said,`We hear, and rebel'; and they were made to drink the Calf in their heartsfor their unbelief.Say: `Evil is the thing your faith bids you to,if you are believers.'
%15% 94.Say: `If the Last Abode with God is yours exclusively, and not for otherpeople, then long for death--if you speak truly.'
95.But they will never long for it, because of thattheir hands have forwarded; God knows the evildoers;96.and thou shalt find them the eagerest of men for life. And of the idolaters;there is one of them wishes if he might be spared a thousand years,yet his being spared alive shall not remove him from the chastisement.God sees the things they do.
97.Say: `Whosoever is and enemy to Gabriel--he it was that brought it down uponthy heart by the leave of God, confirming what was before it;and for a guidance and good tidings to the believers.
98.Whosoever is an enemy to God and His angels and His Messengers, and Gabriel,and Michael--surely God is an enemy to the unbelievers.'
99.And We have sent down unto thee signs, clear signs, and none disbelieves inthem except the ungodly.
100.Why, whensoever they have made a covenant, does a party of them rejectit?Nay, but the most of them are unbelievers.
101.When there has come to them a Messenger from God confirming what was withthem, a party of them that were given the Book reject the Book of Godbehind their backs, as though they knew not,
%16% 102.and they follow what the Satans recited over Solomon's kingdom.Solomon disbelieved not, but the Satans disbelieved, teachingthe people sorcery, and that which was sent down upon Babylon's two angels,Harut and Marut; they taught not any man, without they said,`We are but a temptation; do not disbelieve.'From them they learned how they might divide a man and his wife,yet they did not hurt any man thereby, save by the leave of God,and they learned what hurt them, and did not profit them, knowing wellthat whoso buys it shall have no share in the world to come;evil then was that they sold themselves for, if they had but known.
103.Yet had they believed, and been godfearing,a recompense from God had been better, if they had but known.
104.O believers, do not say, `Observe us,' but say, `Regard us'; and give ear;for unbelievers awaits a painful chastisement.
105.Those unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters wish notthat any good should be sent down upon you from your Lord; but God singlesout for His mercy whom He will; God is of bounty abounding.
%17% 106.And for whatever verse We abrogate or cast into oblivion, We bring a betteror the like of it; knowest thou not that God is powerful over everything?
107.Knowest thou not that to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and theearth, and that you have none, apart from God, neither protector nor helper?
108.Or do you desire to question your Messenger as Moses was questioned informer time?  Whoso exchanges belief for unbelief has surely strayedfrom the right way.
109.Many of the People of the Book wish they might restore you as unbelievers,after you have believed, in the jealousy of their souls, after the truthhas become clear to them; yet do you pardon and be forgiving, till God bringsHis command; truly God is powerful over everything.
110.And perform the prayer, and pay the alms; whatever good you shall forwardto your souls' account, you shall find it with God; assuredly God sees thethings you do.
111.And they say, `None shall enter Paradise except that they be Jews orChristians.'  Such are their fancies.Say: `Produce your proof,if you speak truly.'
112.Nay, but whosoever submits his will to God, being a good--doer, his wage iswith his Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
%18% 113.The Jews say, `The Christians stand not on anything';the Christians say, `They Jews stand not on anything';yet they recite the Book.So too the ignorant say the like of them.God shall decide between them on the Day of Resurrectiontouching their differences.114.And who does greater evil than he who bars God's places of worship,so that His Name be not rehearsed in them, and strives to destroy them?Such men might never enter them, save in fear; for them is degradation inthe present world, and in the world tocome a mighty chastisement.
115.To God belong the East and the West; whithersoever you turn, there is theFace of God; God is All-embracing, All-knowing.
116.And they say, `God has taken to Him a son.' Glory be to Him!  Nay, to Himbelongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; all obey His will--
117.the Creator of the heavens and the earth;and when He decrees a thing, He but says to it `Be', and it is.
118.And they that know not say, `Why does God not speak to us?Why does a sign not come to us?' So spoke those before them as these men say;their hearts are much alike.Yet We have made clear the signs unto a peoplewho are sure.
119.We have sent thee with the truth, good tidings to bear, and warning.Thou shalt not be questioned touching the inhabitants of Hell.
%19% 120.Never will the Jews be satisfied with thee,neither the Christians, not till thou followesttheir religion.Say: `God's guidance is the true guidance.' If thou followesttheir caprices, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou shalt haveagainst God neither protector nor helper.
121.Those to whom We have given the Book and who recite it with true recitation,they believe in it; and whoso disbelieves in it, they shall be the losers.
122.Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you, and that Ihave preferred you above all beings;
123.and beware a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction,and no counterpoise shall be accepted from it, nor any intercession shall beprofitable to it, neither shall they be helped.
124.And when his Lord tested Abraham with certain words, and he fulfilled them.He said, `Behold, I make you a leader for the people.' Said he, `And of myseed?' He said `My covenant shall not reach the evildoers.'
125.And when We appointed the House to be a place of visitation for the people,and a sanctuary, and: `Take to yourselves Abraham's station for a place ofprayer.' And We made covenant with Abraham and Ishmael: `Purify My House forthose that shall go about it and those that cleave to it, to those whobowand prostrate themselves.'
126.And when Abraham said, `My Lord, make this a land secure, and provide itspeople with fruits, such of them as believe in God and the Last Day.' Hesaid, `And whoso disbelieves, to him I shall give enjoyment a little, then Ishall compel him to the chastisement of the Fire--how evil a homecoming!'
%20% 127.And when Abraham, and Ishmael with him, raised up the foundations of theHouse: `Our Lord, receive this from us; Thou artthe All-hearing , the All-knowing;
128.and, our Lord, make us submissive to Thee, and of our seed a nationsubmissive to Thee; and show us our holy rites, and turn towards us; surelyThou turnest, and art All-compassionate;
129.and, our Lord, do Thou send among them a Messenger, one of them, who shallrecite to them Thy signs, and teach them the Book and the Wisdom, and purifythem; Thou art the All-mighty, the All-wise.'
130.Who therefore shrinks from the religion of Abraham, except he befoolish-minded?  Indeed, We chose him in the present world,and in the world to come he shall be among the righteous.
131.When his Lord said to him, `Surrender', he said, `I have surrendered me tothe Lord of all Being.'
132.And Abraham charged his sons with this and Jacob likewise: `My sons, God haschosen for you the religion; see that you die not save in surrender.'
133.Why, were you witnesses, when death came to Jacob?  When he said to his sons,`What will you serve after me?' They said, `We will serve thy God and the Godof thy fathers Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac, One God; to Him we surrender.'
134.That is a nation that has passed away; there awaits them that they haveearned, and there awaits you that you have earned; you shall not bequestioned concerning the things they did.
%21% 135.And they say, `Be Jews or Christians and you shall be guided.' Say thou:`Nay, rather the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith; he was noidolater.'136.Say you: `We believe in God, and in that which has been sent down on usand sent down on Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes,and thatwhich was given to Moses and Jesus and the Prophets, of theirLord; we make no division between any of them, and to Him we surrender.'
137.And if they believe in the like of that you believe in, then they are trulyguided; but if they turn away, then they are clearly in schism; God willsuffice you for them; He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing;
138.the baptism of God; and who is there that baptizes fairer than God?Him we are serving.
139.Say: `Would you then dispute with us concerning God, who is our Lordand your Lord?  Our deeds belong to us, and to you belong your deeds;Him we serve sincerely.
140.Or do you say, "Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes--they wereJews, or they were Christians"?' Say: `Have you then greater knowledge, orGod?  And who does greater evil than he who conceals a testimony receivedfrom God?  And God is not heedless of the things you do.'
141.That is a nation that has passed away; there awaits them that they haveearned, and there awaits you that you have earned; you shall not bequestioned concerning the things they did.
%22% 142.{?}The fools among the people will say, `What has turned them from the directionthey were facing in their prayers aforetime?' Say: `To God belong the Eastand the West; He guides whomsoever He will to a straight path.'
143.Thus We appointed you a midmost nation that you might be witnesses to thepeople, and that the Messenger might be a witness to you; and We did notappoint the direction thou wast facing, except that We might know whofollowed the Messenger from him who turned on his heels--though it were agrave thing save for those whom God has guided; but God would never leaveyour faith to waste--truly, God is All-gentle with the people,All-compassionate.
144.We have seen thee turning thy face about in the heaven; now We will surelyturn thee to a direction that shall satisfy thee. Turn thy face towards theHoly Mosque; and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it. Those whohave been given the Book know it is the truth from their Lord; God is notheedless of the things they do.
145.Yet if thou shouldst bring to those that have been given the Book every sign,they will not follow thy direction; thou art not a follower of theirdirection, neither are they followers of one another's direction.If thoufollowest their caprices, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thenthou wilt surely be among the evildoers
%23% 146.whom We have given the Book, and they recognize it as they recognize theirsons, even though there is a party of them conceal the truth and thatwittingly.
147.The truth comes from thy Lord; then be not among the doubters.
148.Every man has his direction to which he turns; so be you forward in goodworks. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together;surely God is powerful over everything.
149.From whatsoever place thou issuest, turn thy face towards the Holy Mosque;it is the truth from thy Lord.God is not heedless of the things you do.
150.From whatsoever place thou issuest, turn thy face towards the Holy Mosque;and wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it, that the people may nothave any argument against you, excepting the evildoers of them; and fear youthem not, but fear you Me; and that I may perfect My blessing upon you, andthat haply so you may be guided;
151.as also We have sent among you, of yourselves, a Messenger, to recite Oursigns to you and to purify you, and to teach you the Book and the Wisdom, andto teach you that you knew not.
152.So remember Me, and I will remember you; and be thankful to Me; and be younot ungrateful towards Me.
153.O all you who believe, seek you help in patience and prayer; surely God iswith the patient.
%24% 154.And say not of those slain in God's way, `They are dead'; rather they areliving, but you are not aware.
155.Surely We will try you with something of fear and hunger , and diminution ofgoods and lives and fruits; yet give thou good tidings untothe patient
156.who, when they are visited by an affliction, say, `Surely we belong to God,and to Him we return';
157.upon those rest blessings and mercy from their Lord, and those--they arethe truly guided.
158.Safa and Marwa are among the waymarks of God; so whosoever makes thePilgrimage to the House, or the Visitation, it is no fault in him tocircumambulate them; and whoso volunteers good, God is All-grateful,All-knowing
159.Those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance that We have sent down,after We have shown them clearly in the Book--they shall be cursed by Godand the cursers,
160.save such as repent and make amends, and show clearly--towards them I shallturn; I turn, All-compassionate.
161.But those who disbelieve, and die disbelieving--upon them shall rest thecurse of God and the angels, and of men altogether,
162.therein dwelling forever; the chastisement shall not be lightened for them;no respite shall be given them.
163.Your God is One God; there is no god but He, the All-merciful,the All-compassionate.
%25% 164.Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation ofnight and day and the ship that runs in the sea with profit to men, and thewater God sends down from heaven therewith reviving the earth after it isdead and His scattering abroad in it all manner of crawling thing, and theturning about of the winds and the clouds compelled between heaven andearth--surely there are signs for a people having understanding.
165.Yet there be men who take to themselves compeers apart from God, loving themas God is loved; but those that believe love God more ardently. O if theevildoers might see, when they see the chastisement, that the poweraltogether belongs to God, and that God is terrible inchastisement,
166.when those that were followed disown their followers,and they see the chastisement, and their cords are cut asunder,
167.and those that followed say,  `O if only we might return again and disownthem, as they have disowned us!' Even so God shall show them their works.O bitter regrets for them! Never shall they issue from the Fire.
168.O men, eat of what is in the earth lawful and good; and follow not the stepsof Satan; he is a manifest foe to you.
169.He only commands you to evil and indecency, and that you should speak againstGod such things as you know not.
%26% 170.And when it is said to them, `Follow what God has sent down,' they say, `No;but we will follow such things as we found our fathers doing.'  What? And iftheir fathers had no understanding of anything, and if they werenot guided?
171.The likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts tothat which hears nothing, save a call and a cry; deaf, dumb, blind--they donot understand.
172.O believers, eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and givethanks to God, if it be Him that you serve.
173.These things only has He forbidden you: carrion, blood, the flesh of swine,what has been hallowed to other than God. Yet whoso is constrained, notdesiring nor transgressing, no sin shall be on him; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
174.Those who conceal what of the Book God has sent down on them, and sell it fora little price--they shall eat naught but the Fire in their bellies; Godshall not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection neither purify them;there awaits them a painful chastisement.
175.Those are they that have bought error at the price of guidance, andchastisement at the price of pardon; how patiently they shall endurethe Fire!
176.That, because God has sent down the Book with the truth; and those that areat variance regarding the Book are in wide schism.
%27% 177.It is not piety, that you turn your faces to the East and to the West.True piety is this: to believe in God, and the Last Day, the angels, theBook, and the Prophets, to give of one's substance, however cherished, tokinsmen, and orphans, the needy, the traveller, beggars, and to ransom theslave, to perform the prayer, to pay the alms.And they who fulfil theircovenant when they have engaged in a covenant, and endure with fortitudemisfortune, hardship and peril, these are they who are true in their faith,these are the truly godfearing.
178.O believers, prescribed for you is retaliation, touching the slain;freeman for freeman, slave for slave, female for female.But if aught ispardoned a man by his brother, let the pursuing be honourable, and let thepayment be with kindliness.That is a lightening granted you by your Lord,and a mercy; and for him who commits aggression after that--for him thereawaits a painful chastisement.
179.In retaliation there is life for you, men possessed of minds; haply youwill be godfearing.
180.Prescribed for you, when any of you is visited by death, and he leaves behindsome goods, is to make testament in favour of his parents and kinsmenhonourably--an obligation on the godfearing.
181.Then if any man changes it after hearing it, the sin shall rest uponthose who change it; surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
%28% 182.But if any man fears injustice or sin from one making testament, and somakes things right between them, then sin shall not rest upon him; surely Godis All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
183.O believers, prescribedfor you is the Fast, even as it was prescribed forthose that were before you--haply you will be godfearing--
184.for days numbered; and if any of you be sick, or if he be on a journey,then a number of other days; and for those who are able to fast, a redemptionby feeding a poor man.Yet better it is for him who volunteers good,and that you should fast is better for you, if you but know;
185.the month of Ramadan, wherein the Koran was sent down to be a guidanceto the people, and as clear signs of the Guidance and the Salvation.So let those of you, who are present at the month, fast it; and if any of yoube sick, or if he be on a journey, then a number of other days; God desiresease for you, and desires not hardship for you; and that you fulfil thenumber, and magnify God that He has guided you, and haply you willbe thankful.
186.And when My servants question thee concerning Me--I am near to answerthe call of the caller, when he calls to Me; so let them respond to Me,and let them believe in Me; haply so theywill go aright.%29% 187.Permitted to you, upon the night of the Fast, is to go in to your wives;they are a vestment for you, and you are a vestment for them. God knows thatyou have been betraying yourselves, and has turned to you and pardoned you.So now lie with them, and seek what God has prescribed for you. And eat anddrink, until the white thread shows clearly to you from the black thread atthe dawn; then complete the Fast unto the night, and do not lie with themwhile you cleave to the mosques.Those are God's bounds; keep well withinthem.So God makes clear His signs to men; haply they will be godfearing.188.Consume not your goods between you in vanity; neither proffer itto the judges, that you may sinfully consume a portion of other men's goods,and that wittingly.
189.They will question thee concerning the new moons.Say: `They are appointedtimes for the people, and the Pilgrimage.' It is not piety to come to thehouses from the backs of them; but piety is to be godfearing; so come to thehouses bytheir doors, and fear God; haply so you will prosper.
190.And fight in the way of God with those who fight with you, but aggress not:God loves not the aggressors.
%30% 191.And slay them wherever you come upon them, and expel them from where theyexpelled you; persecution is more grievous than slaying. But fight them notby the Holy Mosque until they should fight you there; then, if they fightyou, slay them--such is the recompense of unbelievers--
192.but if they give over, surely God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
193.Fight them, till there is no persecution and the religion is God's; then ifthey give over, there shall be no enmity save for evildoers.
194.The holy month for the holy month; holy things demand retaliation.Whoso commits aggression against you, do you commit aggression against himlike as he has committed against you; and fear you God, and know that God iswith the godfearing.
195.And expend in the way of God; and cast not yourselves by your own handsinto destruction, but be good-doers; Godloves the good-doers.
196.Fulfil the Pilgrimage and the Visitation unto God; but if you are prevented,then such offering as may be feasible. And shave not your heads, till theoffering reaches its place of sacrifice.If any of you is sick, or injuredin his head, then redemption by fast, or freewill offering, or ritualsacrifice. When you are secure, then whosoever enjoys the Visitationuntil the Pilgrimage, let his offering be such as may be feasible; or if hefinds none, then a fast of three days in the Pilgrimage, and of seven whenyou return, that is ten completely; that is for him whose family are notpresent at the Holy Mosque. And fear God, and know that God is terriblein retribution.
%31% 197.The Pilgrimage is in months well-known; whoso undertakes the duty ofPilgrimage in them shall not go in to his womenfolk nor indulge inungodliness and disputing in the Pilgrimage. Whatever good you do, God knowsit. And take provision; but the best provision is godfearing,so fear you Me, men possessed of minds!
198.It is no fault in you, that you should seek bounty from your Lord; but whenyou press on from Arafat, then remember God at the Holy Waymark, and rememberHim as He has guided you, though formerly you were gone astray.
199.Then press on from where the people press on, and pray for God's forgiveness;God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
200.And when you have performed your holy rites remember God, as you rememberyour fathers or yet more devoutly.Now some men there are who say, `Our Lord,give to us in this world'; such men shall have no part in theworld to come.
201.And others there are who say, `Our Lord, give to us in this world good,and good in the world to come, and guard us against thechastisement of the Fire';
202.those--they shall have a portion from what they have earned; and God is swiftat the reckoning .
%32% 203.And remember God during certain days numbered.If any man hastens onin two days, that is no sin in him; and if any delays, it is not a sinin him, if he be godfearing .And fear you God, and know that unto Himyou shall be mustered.
204.And some men there are whose saying upon the present world pleases thee,and such a one calls on God to witnesswhat is in his heart, yet he is most stubborn in altercation,
205.and when he turns his back, he hastens about the earth,to do corruption there and to destroy the tillage and the stock;and God loves not corruption;
206.and when it is said to him, `Fear God', vainglory seizes him in his sin.So Gehenna Hell.shall be enough for him--how evil a cradling!
207.But other men there are that sell themselvesdesiring God's good pleasure; and God is gentle with His servants.
208.O believers, enter the peace Islam., all of you,and follow not the steps of Satan; he is a manifest foe to you.
209.But if you slip after the clear signs have come to you, know then that God isAll-mighty, All-wise.
210.What do they look for, but that God shall come to them in the cloud-shadows,and the angels?  The matter is determined,and unto God all matters are returned.
%33% 211.Ask the Children of Israel how many a clear sign We gave them.Whoso changes God's blessing after it has come to him,God is terrible in retribution.
212.Decked out fair to the unbelievers is the present life, and they deridethe believers; but those who were godfearing shall be above them on theResurrection Day; and God provides whosoever He will without reckoning.
213.The people were one nation; then God sent forth the Prophets,good tidings to bear and warning, and He sent down with themthe Book with the truth, that He might decide between the people touchingtheir differences; and only those who had been given it were at varianceupon it, after the clear signs had come to them, being insolentone to another; then God guided those who believed to the truth,touching which they were at variance, by His leave; and God guideswhomsoever He will to a straight path.
214.Or did you suppose you should enter Paradisewithout there had come upon you the like of those who passed away before you?They were afflicted by misery and hardship and were so convulsed,that the Messenger and those who believed with him said,`When comes God's help?'  Ah, but surely God's help is nigh.
215.They will question thee concerning what they should expend.Say:`Whatsoever good you expend is for parents and kinsmen,orphans, the needy, and the traveller;and whatever good you may do, God has knowledge of it.'
%34% 216.Prescribed for you is fighting, though it be hateful to you.Yet it may happen that you will hate a thingwhich is better for you; and it may happen that youwill love a thing which is worse for you; God knows, and you know not.
217.They will question thee concerning the holy month, and fighting in it.Say: `Fighting in it is a heinous thing,but to bar from God's way, and disbelief in Him,and the Holy Mosque, and to expel its people from it--that is more heinous in God's sight;and persecution is more heinous that slaying.'They will not cease to fight with you, till they turn you from your religion,if they are able; and whosoever of you turns from his religion,and dies disbelieving--their works have failed in this world and the next;those are the inhabitants of the Fire; therein they shall dwell forever.
218.But the believers, and those who emigrateand struggle in God's way--those have hope ofGod's compassion; and God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
219.They will question thee concerning wine, and arrow-shuffling. Say:`In both is heinous sin, and uses for men, but the sin in them is moreheinous than the usefulness.' They will question thee concerning what theyshould expend.Say: `The abundance.'  So God makes clear His signs to you;haply you will reflect;
%35% 220.in this world, and the world to come.They will question thee concerning theorphans. Say: `Go set their affairs aright is good. And if you intermixwith them, they are your brothers.God knows well him who works corruptionfrom him who sets aright; and had He willed He would have harassed you.Surely God is All-mighty, All-wise.'
221.Do not marry idolatresses, until they believe; a believing slavegirlis better than an idolatress, though you may admire her.And do not marryidolaters, until they believe. A believing slave is better than an idolater,though you may admire him. Those call unto the Fire; and God calls untoParadise, and pardon, by His leave, and He makes clear His signs to thepeople; haply they will remember.
222.They will question thee concerning the monthly course.Say: `It is hurt;so go apart from women during the monthly course, and do not approach themtill they are clean.When they have cleansed themselves, then come unto themas God has commanded you.'  Truly, God loves those who repent, and He lovesthose who cleanse themselves.
223.Your women are a tillage for you; so come unto your tillage as you wish,and forward for your souls; and fear God, and know thatyou shall meet Him.Give thou good tidings to the believers.
224.Do not make God a hindrance, through your oaths,to being pious and godfearing, and putting things right between men.Surely God is All-hearing,All-knowing.
%36% 225.God will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths; but He will take youto task for what your hearts have earned; and God is All-forgiving,All-clement.
226.For those who forswear their women a wait of four months; if they revert,God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate;
227.but if they resolve on divorce, surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
228.Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods;and it is not lawful for them to hide what God has created in their wombs;if they believe in God and the Last Day.In such time their mateshave better right to restore them, if they desire to set things right.Women have such honourable rights as obligations, buttheir men have a degree above them; God is All-mighty, All-wise.
229.Divorce is twice; then honourable retention or setting free kindly.It is not lawful for you to take of what you have given them unless thecouple fear they may not maintain God's bounds; if you fear they may notmaintain God's bounds, it is no fault in themfor her to redeem herself.Those are God's bounds; do not transgress them. Whosoever transgresses thebounds of God--those are the evildoers.
230.If he divorces her finally, she shall not be lawful to him after that, untilshe marries another husband. If he divorces her, then it is no fault in themto return to each other, if they suppose that they will maintain God'sbounds.Those are God's bounds; He makes them clear unto a peoplethat have knowledge.
%37% 231.When you divorce women, and they have reached their term,then retain them honourably or set them free honourably;do not retain them by force, to transgress; whoever does thathas wronged himself. Take not God's signs in mockery, and remember God'sblessing upon you, and the book and the Wisdom He has sent down on you,to admonish you. And fear God, and know that God has knowledge ofeverything.
232.When you divorce women, and they have reached their term, do not debar themfrom marrying their husbands, when they have agreed together honourably.That is anadmonition for whoso of you believes in God and the Last Day;that is cleaner and purer for you; God knows, and you know not.
233.Mothers shall suckle their children two years completely, for such as desireto fulfil the suckling. It is for the father to provide them and clothe themhonourably. No soul is charged save to its capacity; a mother shall not bepressed for her child, neither a father for his child.The heir has a like duty. But if the couple desire by mutual consent andconsultation to wean, then it is no fault in them. And if you desire to seeknursing for your children, it is no fault in you provide you hand over whatyou have given honourably; and fear God, and know that God seesthe things you do.
%38% 234.And those of you who die, leaving wives, they shall wait by themselves forfour months and ten nights; when they have reached their term then it is nofault in you what they may do with themselves honourably. God is aware ofthe things you do.
235.There is no fault in you touching the proposal to women you offer, or hide inyour hearts; God knows that you will be mindful of them; but do not make trothwith them secretly without you speak honourable words.And do not resolve on the knot of marriage until the book has reached itsterm; and know that God knows what is in your hearts, so be fearful of Him;and know that God is All-forgiving, All-clement.
236.There is no fault in you, if you divorce women while as yet you have nottouched them nor appointed any marriage-portion for them; yet make provisionfor them, the affluent man according to his means, and according to his meansthe needy man, honourably--an obligation on the good-doers.
237.And if you divorce them before you have touched them, and you have alreadyappointed for them a marriage-portion, then one-half of what you haveappointed, unless it be they make remission, or he makes remissionin whose hand is the knot of marriage; yet that you should remit is nearerto godfearing.Forget not to be bountiful one towards another. Surely Godsees the things you do.
%39% 238.Be you watchful over the prayers, and the middle prayer; and do you standobedient to God.
239.And if you are in fear, then afoot or mounted; but when you are secure, thenremember God, as He taught you the things that you knew not.
240.And those of you who die, leaving wives, let them make testament for theirwives, provision for a year without expulsion; but if they go forth, there isno fault in you what they may do with themselves honourably;God is All-mighty, All-wise.
241.There shall be for divorced women provision honourable--an obligationon the godfearing.
242.So God makes clear His signs for you; haply you will understand.
243.Hast thou not regarded those who went forth from their habitations in theirthousands fearful of death?  God said to them, `Die!' Then He gave them life.Truly God is bounteous to the people, but most of the peopleare not thankful.
244.So fight in God's way, and know that God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
245.Who is he that will lend God a good loan, and He will multiply it for himmanifold?  God grasps, and outspreads; and unto Him you shallbe returned.
%40% 246.Hast thou not regarded the Council of the Children of Israel, after Moses,when they said to a Prophet of theirs, `Raise up for us a king, and we willfight in God's way.'  He said, `Might it be that, if fighting is prescribedfor you, you will not fight?'  They said, `Why should we not fight in God'sway, who have been expelled from our habitations and our children?' Yet whenfighting was prescribed for them, they turned their backs except a few ofthem; and God has knowledge of the evildoers.
247.Then their Prophet said to them, `Verily God has raised up Saul for you asking.' They said, `How should he be king over us who have better right thanhe to kingship, seeing he has not been given amplitude of wealth?' He said,`God has chosen him over you, and has increased him broadly in knowledge andbody. God gives the kingship to whom He will; and God isAll-embracing, All-knowing.'
248.And their Prophet said to them, `The sign of his kingship is that the Ark willcome to you, in it a Shechina sakina-symbol/security.from your Lord, and aremnant of what the folk of Moses and Aaron's folk left behind, the angelsbearing it.Surely in that shall be a sign for you, if you are believers.'
%41% 249.And when Saul went forth with the hosts he said, `God will try you with ariver; whosoever drinks of it is not of me, and whoso tastes it not, he is ofme, saving him whom scoops up with his hand.'  But they drank of it, except afew of them; and when he crossed it, and those who believed with him, theysaid, `We have no power today against Goliath and his hosts.'Said those who reckoned they should meet God, `How often a little company hasovercome a numerous company, by God's leave!  And God is with the patient.'
250.So, when they went forth against Goliath and his hosts, they said, `Our Lord,pour out upon us patience, and make firm our feet, and give us aid against thepeople of the unbelievers!'
251.And they routed them, by the leaveof God, and David slew Goliath; and Godgave him the kingship, and Wisdom, and He taught him such as He willed.HadGod not driven back the people, some by the means of others, the earth hadsurely corrupted; but God is bounteous unto all beings.
252.These are the signs of God We recite to thee in truth,and assuredly thou art of the number of the Envoys.
%42% 253.And those Messengers, some We have preferred above others; some there areto whom God spoke, and some He raised in rank. And We gave Jesus son of Marythe clear signs, and confirmed him with the Holy Spirit. And had God willed,those who came after him would not have fought one against the otherafter the clear signs had come to them; but they fell into variance, and someof them believed, and some disbelieved; and had God willed they would not havefought one against the other; but God does whatsoever He desires.254.O believers, expend of that wherewith We have provided you, before there comesa day wherein shall be neither traffick, nor friendship, nor intercession; andthe unbelievers--they are the evildoers.
255.God there is no god but He, the Living, the Everlasting.Slumber seizes Him not, neither sleep; to Him belongs all that is in theheavens and the earth. Who is there that shall intercede with Him save byHis leave?  He knows what lies before them and what is after them,and they comprehend not anything of His knowledge save such as He wills.His Throne comprises the heavens and earth; the preserving of them oppressesHim not; He is the All-high, the All-glorious.
256.No compulsion is there in religion.Rectitude has become clear from error.So whosoever disbelieves in idols and believes in God, has laid hold ofthe most firm handle, unbreaking; God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
%43% 257.God is the Protector of the believers; He brings them forth from the shadowsinto the light. And the unbelievers--their protectors are idols, that bringthem forth from the light into the shadows; those are the inhabitants of theFire, therein dwelling forever.
258.Hast thou not regarded him who disputed with Abraham, concerning his Lord,that God had given him the kingship?  When Abraham said, `My Lord is He whogives life, and makes to die,' he said, `I give life, and make to die.' SaidAbraham, `God brings the sun from the east; so bring thou it from the west.'Then the unbeliever was confounded. God guides not thepeople of the evildoers.
259.Or such as he who passed by a city that was fallen down upon its turrets;he said, `How shall God give life to this now it is dead?'  So God made himdie a hundred years, then He raised him up, saying, `How long hast thoutarried?'  He said, `I have tarried a day, or part of a day.' Said He, `Nay;thou hast tarried a hundred years. Look at thy food and drink--it has notspoiled; and look at thy ass.So We would make thee a sign for the people.Andlook at the bones, how We shall set them up, and then clothe them with flesh.'So, when it was made clear to him, he said, `I know that God is powerfulover everything.'
%44% 260.And when Abraham said, `My Lord, show me how Thou wilt give life to the dead,'He said, `Why, dost thou not believe?' `Yes,' he said, `but that my heart maybe at rest.'  Said He, `Take four birds, and twist them to thee, then set apart of them on every hill, then summon them, and they will come to theerunning. And do thou know that God is All-mighty, All-wise.'
261.The likeness of those who expend their wealth in the way of God is as thelikeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundredgrains. So God multiplies unto whom He will;God is All-embracing, All-clement.
262.Those who expend their wealth in the way of God then follow not up what theyhave expended with reproach and injury, their wage is with their Lord,and no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
263.Honourable words, and forgiveness, are better than a freewill offeringfollowed by injury; and God is All-sufficient, All-clement.
264.O believers, void not your freewill offerings with reproach and injury, as onewho expends of his substance to show off to men and believes not in God andthe Last Day.
%45% 265.The likeness of him is as the likeness of a smooth rock on which is soil,and a torrent smites it, and leaves it barren. They have no power overanything that they have earned. God guides not the people of the unbelievers.But the likeness of those who expend their wealth, seeking God's goodpleasure, and to confirm themselves, is as the likenessof a garden upon a hill; a torrent smites it and it yields its producetwofold; if no torrent smites it, yet dew;and God sees the things you do.
266.Would any of you wish to have a garden of palms and vines, with rivers flowingbeneath it, and all manner of fruit there for him, then old age smites him,and he has seed, but weaklings, then a whirlwind with fire smites it, and itis consumed?  So God makes clear the signs to you; haply you will reflect.
267.O believers, expend of the good things you have earned, and of that Wehave produced for you from the earth, and intend not the corrupt of itforyour expending; for you would never take it yourselves, except you closed aneye on it; and know that God is All-sufficient, All-laudable.
268.Satan promises you poverty, and bids you unto indecency; but God promises youHis pardon and His bounty; and God is All-embracing, All-knowing.
269.He gives the Wisdom to whomsoever He will, and whoso is given the Wisdom, hasbeen given much good; yet none remembers but men possessed of minds.
%46% 270.And whatever expenditure you expend, and whatever vow you vow, surely Godknows it. No helpers have the evildoers.
271.If you publish your freewill offerings, it is excellent; but if you concealthem, and give them to the poor, that is better for you, and willacquit you of your evil deeds; God is aware of the things you do.
272.Thou art not responsible for guiding them; but God guides whomsoever He will.And whatever good you expend is for yourselves, for then you are expending,being desirous only of God's Face; and whatever good you expend shall berepaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged,
273.it being for the poor who are restrained in the way of God, and are unableto journey in the land; the ignorant man supposes them rich because of theirabstinence, but thou shalt know them by their mark--they do not beg of menimportunately. And whatever good you expend, surely God has knowledge of it.
274.Those who expend their wealth night and day, secretly and in public, theirwage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neither shallthey sorrow.
%47% 275.Those who devout usury shall not rise again except as he rises, whom Satan ofthe touch prostrates; that is because they say,  `Trafficking is like usury.'God has permitted trafficking, and forbidden usury. Whosoever receives anadmonition from his Lord and gives over, he shall have his past gains, and hisaffair is committed to God; but whosoever reverts--those are the inhabitantsof the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
276.God blots out usury, but freewill offerings He augments with interest.Godloves not any guilty ingrate.
277.Those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, and perform the prayer, andpay the alms--their wage awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall be onthem neither shall they sorrow.
278.O believers, fear you God; and give up the usury that is outstanding, ifyou are believers.
279.But if you do not, then take notice that God shall war with you, and HisMessenger; yet if you repent, you shall have your principal, unwronging andunwronged.
280.And if any man should be in difficulties, let him have respite till things areeasier; but that you should give freewill offerings is better for you,did you but know.
281.And fear a day wherein you shall be returned to God, and every soul shall bepaid in full what it has earned; and they shall not be wronged.
%48% 282.O believers, when you contract a debt one upon another for a stated term,write it down, and let a writer write it down between you justly,and let not any writer refuse to write it down, as God has taught him;so let him write, andlet the debtor dictate, and let him fear God his Lordand not diminish aught of it.And if the debtor be a fool, or weak, or unableto dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate justly.And call in towitness two witnesses, men; or if the two be not men, then one man and twowomen, such witnesses as you approve of, that if one of the two women errsthe other will remind her; and let the witnesses not refuse, whenever they aresummoned.And be not loth to write it down, whether it be small or great, withits term; that is more equitable in God's sight,more upright for testimony, and likelier that you will no be in doubt.Unlessit be merchandise present that you give and take between you; then it shall beno fault in you if you do not write it down.And take witnesseswhen you are trafficking one with another.And let not either writer orwitness be pressed; or if you do, that is ungodliness in you. And fear God;God teaches you, and God has knowledge of everything.
%49% 283.And if you are upon a journey, and youdo not find a writer, then a pledge inhand. But if one of you trusts another, let him who is trusted deliver histrust, and let him fear God his Lord. And do not conceal the testimony;whoso conceals it, his heart is sinful; and God has knowledge of the thingsyou do.
284.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and earth. Whether you publish whatis in your hearts or hide it, God shall make reckoning with you for it .Hewill forgive whom He will, and chastise whom He will; God is powerful overeverything.
285.The Messenger believes in what was sent down to him from his Lord, and thebelievers; each one believes in God and His angels, and in His Books and HisMessengers; we make no division between any one of His Messengers.They say,`We hear, and obey.Our Lord, grant us Thy forgiveness; unto Thee is thehomecoming.'
286.God charges no soul save to its capacity; standing to its account is what ithas earned, and against its account what it has merited.Our Lord, take us notto task if we forget, or make mistake.Our Lord, charge us not with a loadsuch as Thou didst lay upon those before us.Our Lord, do Thou not burden usbeyond what we have the strength to bear.And pardon us, and forgive us,and have mercy on us; Thou art our Protector. And help us against the peopleof the unbelievers.
%50% <3,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.God there is no god but He, the Living, the Everlasting.
3.He has sent down upon thee the Book with the truth, confirming what was beforeit, and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel aforetime, as guidance to thepeople, and He sent down the Salvation.
4.As for those who disbelieve in God's signs, for them awaits a terriblechastisement; God is All-mighty, Vengeful.
5.From God nothing whatever is hidden in heaven and earth.
6.lt is He who forms you in the womb as He will.There is no god but He,the All-mighty, the All-wise.
7.lt is He who sent down upon thee the Book, wherein are verses clear that arethe Essence of the Book, and others ambiguous.As for those in whose hearts isswerving, they follow the ambiguous part, desiring dissension, and desiringits interpretation; and none knows its interpretation, save only God. Andthose firmly rooted in knowledge say, `We believe in it; all is from ourLord'; yet none remembers, but men possessed of minds.
8.Our Lord, make not our hearts to swerve after that Thou hast guided us; andgive us mercy from Thee; Thou art the Giver.
9.Our Lord, it is Thou that shall gather mankind for a day whereon is no doubt;verily God will not fail the tryst.
%51% 10.As for the unbelievers, their riches will not avail them, neither theirchildren, aught against God; those--they shall be fuel forthe Fire
11.like Pharaoh's folk, and the people before them, who cried lies to Our signs;God seized them because of their sins; God is terrible in retribution.
12.Say to the unbelievers: `You shall be overthrown, and mustered into Gehenna--an evil cradling!'
13.There has already been a sign for you in the two companies that encountered,one company fighting in the way of God and another unbelieving; they saw themtwice the like of them, as the eye sees, but God confirms with His help whomHe will.Surely in that is a lesson for men possessed of eyes.
14.Decked out fair to men is the love of lusts--women, children, heaped-up heapsof gold and silver, horses of mark, cattle and tillage.That is the enjoymentof the present life; but God--with Him is the fairest resort.
15.Say: `Shall I tell you of a better than that?'  For those that are godfearing,with their Lord are gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwellingforever, and spouses purified, and God's good pleasure.And God sees Hisservants
%52% 16.who say, `Our Lord, we believe; forgive us our sins, and guard us againstthe chastisement of the Fire'--
17.men who are patient, truthful, obedient, expenders in alms, imploring God'spardon at the daybreak.
18.God bears witness that there is no god but He--and the angels, and menpossessed of knowledge--upholding justice; there is no god but He,theAll-mighty, the All-wise.
19.The true religion with God is Islam.Those who were given the Book were not at variance except after the knowledgecame to them, being insolent one to another.And whoso disbelieves in God'ssigns, God is swift at the reckoning.
20.So if they dispute with thee, say:  `I have surrendered my will to God, andwhosoever follows me.'  And say to those who have been given the Book and tothe common folk: `Have you surrendered!' If they have surrendered, they areright guided; but if they turn their backs, thine it is only to deliver theMessage; and God sees His servants.
21.Those who disbelieve in the signs God and slay the Prophets without right,and slay such men as bid to justice--do thou give them the good tidings ofa painful chastisement;
22.their works have failed in this world and the next; they have no helpers.
%53% 23.Hast thou not regarded those who were given a portion of the Book, beingcalled to the Book of God, that it might decide between them, and then a partyof them turned away, swerving aside?
24.That, because they said, `The Fire shall not touch us, except for a number ofdays'; and the lies they forged has deluded them in their religion.
25.But how will it be, when We gather them for a day whereon is no doubt, andevery soul shall be paid in full what it has earned, and they shall notbe wronged?
26.Say:`O God, Master of the Kingdom, Thou givest the Kingdom to whom Thou wilt,and seizest the Kingdom from whom Thou wilt, Thou exaltest whom Thou wilt, andThou abasest whom Thou wilt; in Thy hand is the good; Thou art powerfulover everything.
27.Thou makest the night to enter into the day and Thou makest the day to enterinto the night, Thou bringest forth the living from the deadand Thou bringest forth the dead from the living,and Thou providest whomsoever Thou wilt without reckoning.'
28.Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends, rather than thebelievers--for whoso does that belongs not to God in anything--unless youhave a fear of them. God warns you that you beware of Him,and unto God is the homecoming.
29.Say: `Whether you hide what is in your breasts or publish it, God knows it.God knows what is in the heavens ad what is in the earth; and God is powerfulover everything.'
%54% 30.The day every soul shall find what it has done of good brought forward, andwhat it has done of evil; it will wish if there were only a far spacebetween it and that day. God warns you that you beware of Him; and God isgentle with His servants.
31.Say: `If you love God, follow me, and God will love you, and forgive you yoursins; God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.'
32.Say: `Obey God, and the Messenger.' But if they turn their backs, God lovesnot the unbelievers.
33.God chose Adam and Noah and the House of Abraham and the House of Imranabove all beings,
34.the seed of one another; God hears, and knows.
35.When the wife of Imran said, `Lord, I have vowed to Thee, in dedication,what is within my womb.Receive Thou this from me; Thou hearest,and knowest.'
36.And when she gave birth to hershe said, `Lord, I have given birth to her, afemale.' And God knew very well what she had given birth to: the male is notas the female..`And I have named her Mary, and commend her to Thee with herseed, to protect them from the accursed Satan.'
37.Her Lord received the child with gracious favour, and by His goodnessshe grew up comely, Zachariah taking charge of her.Whenever Zachariah went into her in the Sanctuary, he found her provisioned.`Mary,`he said, `how comes this to thee?` `From God,`she said.Truly Godprovisions whomsoever He will without reckoning.
%55% 38.Then Zachariah prayed to his Lord saying, `Lord, give me of Thy goodnessa goodly offspring.
39.Yea, Thou hearest prayer.'  And the angels called to him, standingin the Sanctuary at worship, `Lo, God gives thee good tidings of John, whoshall confirm a Word of God, a chief, and chaste, a Prophet, righteous.'
40.`Lord,' said Zachariah, `how shall I have son, seeing I am an old man and mywife is barren?' `Even so,' God said, `God does whatHe will.'
41.`Lord,' said Zachariah, `appoint to me a sign.'  `Thy sign,' God said,`is that thou shalt not speak, save by tokens, to men for three days.And mention thy Lord oft, and give glory at evening and dawn.'
42.And when the angels said, `Mary, God has chosen thee, and purified thee; Hehas chosen thee above all women.
43.Mary, be obedient to thy Lord, prostrating and bowing before Him.'
44.O Apostle.That is of the tidings of the Unseen, that We reveal to thee; forthou wast not with them, when they were casting quills which of them shouldhave charge of Mary; thou wast not with them, when they were disputing.
45.When the angels said, `Mary, God gives thee good tidings of a Word from Himwhose name is Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary; high honoured shall he bein this world and the next, near stationed to God.
%56% 46.He shall speak to men in the cradle, and of age, and righteous he shall be.'
47.`Lord,' said Mary, `how shall I have a son seeing no mortal has touched me?'`Even so,' God said, `God creates what He will.When He decrees a thing He does but say to it " Be," and it is.
48.And He will teach him the Book, the Wisdom, the Torah, the Gospel,
49.to be a Messenger to the Children of Israel saying, "I have come to you with asign from your Lord.I will create for you out of clay as the likeness of abird; then I will breathe into it, and it will be a bird, by the leave of God.I will also heal the blind and the leper, and bring to life the dead, by theleave of God.I will inform you too of what things you eat, and what youtreasure up in your houses.Surely in that is a sign for you,if you are believers.
50.Likewise confirming the truth of the Torah that is before me, and to makelawful to you certain things that before were forbidden unto you.I have come to you with a sign from your Lord; so fear you God, andobey you me.
51.Surely God is my Lord and your Lord; so serve Him.This is astraight path".'
52.And when Jesus perceived their unbelief, he said, `Who will be my helpersunto God?' The Apostles said, `We will be helpers of God; we believe in God;witness thou our submission.
%57% 53.Lord, we believe in that Thou hast sent down, and we follow the Messenger.Inscribe us therefore with those who bear witness.'
54.And they devised, and God devised, and God is the best of devisers.
55.When God said, `Jesus, I will take thee to Me and will raise thee to Me,and I will purify thee of those who believe not.I will set thy followersabove the unbelievers till the Resurrection Day.Then unto Me shall youreturn, and I will decide between you, as to what you were atvariance on.
56.As for the unbelievers, I will chastise them with a terrible chastisementin this world and the next; they shall have no helpers.'
57.But as for the believers, who do deeds of righteousness, He will pay themin full their wages: and God loves not the evildoers.
58.This We recite to thee of signs and wise remembrance.
59.Truly, the likeness of Jesus, in God's sight, is as Adam's likeness;He created him of dust, then said He unto him, `Be,' and he was.
60.The truth is of God; be not of the doubters.
61.And whoso disputes with thee concerning him, after the knowledge that has cometo thee, say: `Come now, let us call our sons and your sons, our wives andyour wives, our selves and your selves, then let us humbly pray and so layGod's curse upon the ones who lie.'
%58% 62.This is the true story.There is no god but God, and assuredly God isthe All mighty, the All-wise.
63.And if they turn their backs, assuredly God knows the workers of corruption.
64.Say: `People of the Book!  Come now to a word common between us and you, thatwe serve none but God, and that we associate not aught with Him, and do notsome of us take others as Lords, apart from God.' And if they turn theirbacks, say: `Bear witness that we are Muslims.'
65.People of the Book!  Why do you dispute concerning Abraham? The Torah was notsent down, neither the Gospel, but after him.What, have youno reason?
66.Ha, you are the ones who dispute on what you know; why then dispute youtouching a matter of which you know not anything? God knows,and you know not.
67.No; Abraham in truth was not a Jew, neither a Christian; but he was a Muslimand one pure of faith; certainly he was never of the idolaters.
68.Surely the people standing closest to Abraham are those who followed him, andthis Prophet, and those who believe; and God is the Protectorof the believers.
69.There is a party of the people of the Book yearn to make you go astray; yetnone they make to stray, except themselves, but they are not aware.
70.People of the Book! Why do you disbelieve in God's signs, which youyourselves witness?
%59% 71.People of the Book! Why do you confound the truth with vanity, and concealthe truth and that wittingly?
72.There is a party of the People of the Book say, `Believe in what has been sentdown upon those who believe at the beginning of the day, and disbelieve at theend of it; haply they will then return;
73.and believe not any but him who follows your religion.' Say: `The trueguidance is God's guidance--that anyone should begiven the like of what youhave been given, or dispute with you before your Lord.' Say: `Surely bountyis in the hand of God; He gives it unto whomsoever He will; and God isAll-embracing, All-knowing.
74.He singles out for His mercy whom He will; God is of bounty abounding.'
75.And of the People of the Book is he who, if thou trust him with ahundredweight, will restore it thee; ands of them is he who, if thou trusthim with one pound, will not restore it thee, unless ever thou standest overhim. That, because they say, `There is no way over us as to the commonpeople.' They speak falsehood against God and that wittingly.
76.Nay, but whoso fulfils his covenant and fears God, God loves the godfearing.
77.Those that sell God's covenant, and their oaths, for a little price, thereshall be no share for them in the world to come; God shall not speak to themneither look on them on the Resurrection Day, neither will He purify them; andfor them awaits a painful chastisement.
%60% 78.And there is a sect of them twist their tongues with the Book, that you maysuppose it part of the Book, yet it is not part of the Book,; and theysay, `It is from God,' yet it is not from God, and they speak falsehoodagainst God, and that wittingly.
79.It belongs not to any mortal that God should give him the Book, the Judgment,the Prophethood, then he should say to men, `Be you servants to me apart fromGod.' Rather, `Be you masters in that you know the Book, and in thatyou study.'
80.He would never order you to take the angels and the Prophets as Lords; what,would He order you to disbelieve, after you have surrendered?
81.And when God took compact with the Prophets: `That I have given you of Bookand Wisdom; then there shall come to you a Messenger confirming what is withyou--you shall believe in him and you shall help him; do you agree?' He said.`And do you take My load on you on that condition?' They said, `We do agree.'God said, `Bear witness so, and I shall be with you among the witnesses.'
82.Then whosoever turns his back after that--they are ungodly.
83.What, do they desire another religion than God's, and to Him has surrenderedwhoso is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and to Himthey shall be returned?
%61% 84.Say: `We believe in God, and that which has been sent down on us, and sentdown on Abraham and Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes, and in thatwhich was given to Moses and Jesus, and the Prophets, of their Lord; we makeno division between any of them, and to Him we surrender.'
85.Whoso desires another religion than Islam, it shallnot be accepted of him; in the next world he shall be among thelosers.
86.How shall God guide a people who have disbelieved after they believed, andbore witness that the Messenger is true, and the clear signs came to them?God guides not the people of the evildoers.
87.Those--their recompense is that there shall rest on them the curse of God andof the angels and of men, altogether,
88.therein dwelling forever; the chastisement shall not be lightenedfor them; no respite shall be given them.
89.But those who repent thereafter, and make amends--God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
90.Surely those who disbelieve after they have believed and then increase inunbelief--their repentance shall not be accepted; those are the oneswho stray.
91.Surely those who disbelieve, and die disbelieving, there shall not beaccepted from any one of them the whole earth full of gold, if he wouldransom himself thereby; for them awaits a painful chastisement, and theyshall have no helpers.
%62% 92.You will not attain piety until you expend of what you love; and whateverthing you expend, God knows of it.
93.All food was lawful to the Children of Israelsave what Israel forbade for himself before the Torah was sent down.Say:`Bring you the Torah now, and recite it, if you are truthful.'
94.Whoso forges falsehood against God after that, those are the evildoers.
95.Say:`God has spoken the truth; therefore follow the creed of Abraham, a manof pure faith and no idolater.'
96.The first House established for the people was that at Bekka, a place holy,and a guidance to all beings.
97.Therein are clear signs--the station of Abraham, and whosoever enters it isin security. It is the duty of all men towards God to come to the House apilgrim, if he is able to make his way there. As for the unbeliever, God isAll-sufficient nor needs any being.
98.Say: `People of the Book, why do you disbelievein the signs of God?  Surely God is witness of the things you do.'
99.Say: `People of the Book, why do you bar from God's way the believer,desiring to make it crooked, yourselves being witnesses?  God is not heedlessof the things you do.'
100.O believers, if you obey a sect of those who have been given the Book, theywill turn you, after you have believed, into unbelievers.
%63% 101.How can you disbelieve, seeing you have God's signs recited to you, and HisMessenger among you?  Whosoever holds fast to God, he is guided toa straight path.
102.O believers, fear God as He should be feared, and see you do not die,save in surrender.
103.And hold you fast to God's bond, together, and do not scatter; remember God'sblessing upon you when you were enemies, and He brought your hearts together,so that by His blessing you became brothers. You were upon the brink of apit of Fire, and He delivered you from it; even so God makes clear to you Hissigns; so haply you will be guided.
104.Let there be one nation of you, calling to good, and bidding to honour, andforbidding dishonour; those are the prosperers.
105.Be not as those who scattered and fell into variance after the clear signscame to them; those there awaits a mighty chastisement,
106.the day when some faces are blackened, and some faces whitened. As for thosewhose faces are blackened--`Did you disbelieve after you had believed? Thentaste the chastisement for that you disbelieved!'
107.But as for those whose faces are whitened, they shall be in God's mercy,therein dwelling forever.
108.These are the signs of God We recite to thee in truth, and God desires notany injustice to living beings.
%64% 109.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and in earth, and unto Him allmatters are returned.
110.You are the best nation ever brought forth to men, bidding to honour, andforbidding dishonour, and believing in God.Had the People of the Bookbelieved, it were better for them; some of them are believers, but the mostof them are ungodly.
111.They will not harm you, except a little hurt; and if they fight with you,they will turn on you their backs; then they will not be helped.
112.Abasement shall be pitched on them,  wherever they are come upon, except theybe in a bond of God, and a bond of the people; they will be laden with theburden of God's anger, and poverty shall be pitched on them; that, becausethey disbelieved in God's signs, and slew the Prophets without right;that, for that they acted rebelliously and were transgressors.
113.Yet they are not all alike; some of the people of the Book are a nationupstanding, that recite God's signs in the watches of the night, bowingthemselves,
114.believing in God and in the Last Day, bidding to honour and forbiddingdishonour, vying one with the other in good works; those are of therighteous.
115.And whatsoever good you do, you shall not be denied the just reward of it;and God knows the godfearing.
%65% 116.As for the unbelievers, their riches shall not avail them, neither theirchildren, against God; those are the inhabitants of the Fire, thereindwelling forever.
117.The likeness of that they expend in this present life is as the likeness ofa freezing blast that smites the tillage of a people who wronged themselves,and it destroyed that; God wronged them not, but themselves they wronged.
118.O believers, take not for your intimates outside yourselves; such men sparenothing to ruin you; they yearn for you to suffer. Hatred has already shownitself of their mouths, and what their breasts conceal is yet greater.Now We have made clear to you the signs, if you understand.
119.Ha, there you are; you love them, and they love you not; you believe in theBook, all of it, and when they meet you they say, `We believe,' but when theygo privily, they bite at you their fingers, enraged. Say: `Die in your rage;God knows the thoughts in the breasts.
120.If you are visited by good fortune, it vexes them; but if you are smitten byevil, they rejoice at it. Yet if you are patient and godfearing, theirguile will hurt you nothing; God encompasses the thingsthey do.
121.When thou wentest forth at dawn from thy people to lodgethe believers in their pitches for the battle--God isAll-hearing, All-knowing--
%66% 122.when two parties of you were about to lose heart, though God was theirprotector--and in God let the believers put all their trust--
123.and God most surely helped you at Badr, when you were utterly abject.So fearGod, and haply you will be thankful.
124.When thou saidst to the believers, `Is it not enough for you that your Lordshould reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down upon you?
125.Yea; if you are patient and godfearing, and the foe come against youinstantly,your Lord will reinforce you with five thousandswooping angels.'
126.God wrought this not, save as good tiding to you, and that your hearts mightbe at rest; help comes only from God the All-mighty, the All-wise;
127.and that He might cut off a part of the unbelievers or frustrate them, sothat they turned in their tracks, disappointed.
128.No part of the matter is thine, whether He turnstowards them again, or chases them; for they are evildoers.
129.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and earth; He forgives whom Hewill, and chastises whom He will; God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
130.O believers, devour not usury, doubled and redoubled, and fear you God;haply so you will prosper.
131.And fear the Fire prepared for the unbelievers,
132.and obey God and the Messenger; haply so you will find mercy.
%67% 133.and vie with one another, hastening to forgiveness from your Lord, and to agarden whose breadth is as the heavens and earth, prepared forthe godfearing
134.who expend in prosperity and adversity in almsgiving, and restrain theirrage, and pardon the offences of their fellowmen; and God loves thegood-doers;
135.who, when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves, remember God, andpray forgiveness for their sins--and who shall forgive sins but God?--and donot persevere in the things they did and that wittingly.
136.Those--their recompense is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens beneathwhich rivers flow, therein dwelling forever; and how excellent is the wageof those who labour!
137.Divers institutions have passed away before you; journey in the land, andbehold how was the end of those that cried lies.
138.This is an exposition for mankind, and a guidance, and an admonition forsuch as are godfearing.
139.Faint not, neither sorrow; you shall be the upper ones if you are believers.
140.If a wound touches you, a like wound already has touched the heathen; suchdays We deal out in turn among men, and that God may know who are thebelievers, and that He may take witnesses from among you; and God lovesnot the evildoers;
%68% 141.and that God may prove the believers, and blot out the unbelievers.
142.Or did you suppose you should enter paradise without God know who of you havestruggled and who are patient?
143.You were longing for death before you met it; now you have seen it, while youwere beholding.
144.Muhammad is naught but a Messenger; Messengers have passed away before him.Why, if he should die or is slain, will you turn about on your heels?If any man should turn about on his heels, he will not harm God in any way;and God will recompense the thankful.
145.It is not given to any soul to die, save by the leave of God, at an appointedtime.Whoso desires the reward of this world, We will give him of this; andwhoso desires the reward of the other world, We will give him of that; and Wewill recompense the thankful.
146.Many a prophet there has been, with whom thousands manifold have fought, andthey fainted not for what smote them in God's way, neither weakened, nor didthey humble themselves; and God loves the patient.
147.Nothing else they said but, `Lord, forgive us our sins, and that we exceededin our affair, and make firm our feet, and help us against the people of theunbelievers.'
148.And God gave them the reward of this world and the fairest reward of theworld to come; and God loves the good-doers.
%69% 149.O believers, if you obey the unbelievers they will turn you upon your heels,and you will turn about, losers.
150.No; but God is your Protector, and He is the best of helpers.
151.We will cast into the hearts of the unbelievers terror, for that they haveassociated with God that for which He sent down never authority;their lodging shall be the Fire; evil is the lodging of the evildoers.
152.God had has been true in His promise towards you when you blasted them by Hisleave; until you lost heart, and quarrelled about the matter, and wererebellious, after He had shown you that you longed for.Some of you there are that desire this world, and some of you there aredesire the next world. Then He turned you from them that He might try you,and He has pardoned you; and God is bounteous to the believers.
153.When you were going up, not twisting about for anyone, and the Messenger wascalling you in your rear; so He rewarded you with grief in grief that youmight not sorrow for what escaped you neither for what smote you; and Godis aware of the things you do.
%70% 154.Then He sent down upon you, after grief, security--a slumber overcoming aparty of you; and a party themselves had grieved, thinking of God thoughtsthat were not true such as the pagans thought, saying, `Have we any partwhatever in the affair?'  Say: `The affair belongs to God entirely.'  Theywere concealing in their hearts that they show not to thee, saying, `Ah, ifwe had had a part in the affair, never would we have been slain here.'  Say:`Even if you had been in your houses, those for whom slaying was appointedwould have sallied forth unto their last couches'; and that God might trywhat was in your breasts, and that He might prove what was in your hearts;and God knows the thoughts in the breasts.
155.Those of you who turned away the day the two hosts encountered--Satan madethem slip for somewhat they had earned; but God has pardoned them; God isAll-forgiving, All-clement.
156.O believers, be not as the unbelievers who say to their brothers, when theyjourney in the land,or are upon expeditions, `If they had been with us, theywould not have died and not been slain'--that God may make that an anguishin their hearts.For God gives life, and He makes to die; and God sees thethings you do.
157.If you are slain or die in God's way, forgiveness and mercy from God are abetter thing than that you amass;
%71% 158.surely if you die or are slain, it is unto God you shall be mustered.
159.It was by some mercy of God that thou wast gentle to them; hadst thou beenharsh and hard of heart, they would have scattered from about thee.So pardonthem, and pray forgiveness for them, and take counsel with them in theaffair; and when thou art resolved, put thy trust in God; surely God lovesthose who put their trust.
160.If God helps you, none can overcome you; but if He forsakes you, who thencan help you after Him?  Therefore in God let the believers put alltheir trust.
161.It is not for a prophet to be fraudulent; whoso defrauds shall bring thefruits of his fraud on the Day of Resurrection; then every soul shall be paidin full what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged.
162.What, is he who follows God's good pleasure like him who is laden with theburden of God's anger, whose refuge is Gehenna? Hell An evil homecoming!
163.They are in ranks with God; and sees the things they do.
164.Truly God was gracious to the believers when He raised up among them aMessenger from themselves, to recite to them His signs and to purify them,and to teach them the Book and the Wisdom, though before they were inmanifest error.
165.Why, when an affliction visited you, and you had visited twice over the likeof it, did you say, `How is this?'  Say: `This is from your own selves;surely God is powerful over everything.'
%72% 166.And what visited you, the day the two hosts encountered, was by God's leave,and that He might know the believers:
167.and that He might also know the hypocrites when it was said of them, `Comenow, fight in the way of God, or repel!' They said, `If only we knew how tofight, we would follow you.' They that day were nearer to unbelief than tobelief, saying with their mouths that which never was in their hearts; andGod knows very well the things they hide;
168.who said of their brothers and they themselves held back., `Had they obeyedus, they would not have been slain.' Say: `Then avert death from yourselves,if you speak truly.'
169.Count not those who were slain in God's way as dead, but rather living withtheir Lord, by Him provided,
170.rejoicing in the bounty that God has given them, and joyful in those whoremain behind and have not joined them, because no fear shall be on them,neither shall they sorrow,
171.joyful in blessing and bounty from God, and that God leaves not to waste thewage of the believers.
172.And those who answered God and the Messenger after the wound had smittenthem--to all those of them who did good and feared God, shall bea mighty wage;
173.those to whom the people said, `The people have gathered against you,therefore fear them'; but it increased them in faith, and they said, 'God issufficient for us; an excellent Guardian is He.'
%73% 174.So they returned with blessing and bountyfrom God, untouched by evil; they followed the good pleasure of God; and Godis of bounty abounding.
175.That is Satan frightening his friends, therefore do not fear them; but fearyou Me, if you are believers.
176.Let them not grieve thee that vie with one anotherin unbelief; they will nothing hurt God; God desires not to appoint forthem a portion in the world to come, and there awaits thema mighty chastisement.
177.Those who buy unbelief at the price of faith, they will nothing hurt God; andthere awaits them a painful chastisement.
178.And let not the unbelievers supposethat the indulgence We grant them isbetter for them;  We grant them indulgence only that they may increase insin; and there awaits them a humbling chastisement.
179.God will not leave the believers in the state in which you are, till He shalldistinguish the corrupt from the good, and God will not inform you of theUnseen; but God chooses out of His Messengers whom He will.Believe you thenin God and His Messengers; and if you believe and are godfearing, there shallbe for you a mighty wage.
180.But as for those who are niggardly with the bounty God has given them, letthem not suppose it is better for them; nay, it is worse for them; that theywere niggardly with they shall have hung about their necks on theResurrection Day; and to God belongs the inheritance of the heavens andearth; and God is aware of the things you do.
%74% 181.God has heard the saying of those who said, `Surely God is poor, and we arerich.' We shall write down what they have said, and their slaying theprophets without right, and We shall say, `Taste the chastisement of theburning--
182.that, for what your hands have forwarded, and for that God is never unjustunto His servants.'
183.Those same men said, `God has made covenant with us, that we believe not anyMessenger until he brings to us a sacrifice devoured by fire.' Say;`Messengers have come to you before me bearing clear signs, and that youspoke of; why therefore did you slay them, if you speak truly?'
184.But if they cry lies to thee, lies were cried to Messengers before thee, whocame bearing clear signs, and the Psalms, and the Book Illuminating.
185.Every soul shall taste of death; you shall surely be paid in full your wageson the Day of Resurrection.Whosoever is removed from the Fire and admittedto Paradise, shall win the triumph.The present life is but thejoy of delusion.
186.You shall surely be tried in your possessions and your selves, and you shallhear from those who were given the Book before you, and from those who areidolaters, much hurt; but if you are patient and godfearing--surely thatis true constancy.
%75% 187.And when God took compact with those who had been given the Book; `You shallmake it clear unto the people, and not conceal it.'  But they rejected itbehind their backs and sold it for a small price__how evil was thattheir selling!
188.Reckon not that those who rejoice in what they have brought, and love to bepraised for what they have not done--do not reckon them secure fromchastisement; for them awaits a painful chastisement.
189.To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and of the earth; and God ispowerful over everything.
190.Surely in the creation of the heavens and earth and in the alternation ofnight and day there are signs for men possessed of minds
191.who remember God, standing and sitting and on their sides, and reflect uponthe creation of the heavens and the earth: `Our Lord, Thou hast not createdthis for vanity.Glory be to Thee! Guard us against the chastisementof the Fire
192.Our Lord, whomsoever Thou admittest into the Fire, Thou wilt have abased;and the evildoers shall have no helpers.
193.Our Lord, we have heard a caller calling us to belief, saying, "Believe youin your Lord!"  And we believe.Our Lord, forgive Thou us our sins andacquit us of our evil deeds, and take us to Thee with the pious.
194.Our Lord, give us what Thou hast promised us by Thy Messengers, and abase usnot on the Day of Resurrection; Thou wilt not fail the tryst.'
%76% 195.And their Lord answers them:  `I waste not the labour of any that labouramong you, be you male or female--the one of you is as the other.And thosewho emigrated, and were expelled from their habitations, those who sufferedhurt in My way, and fought, and were slain--them I shall surely acquit oftheir evil deeds, and I shall admit them to gardens underneath which riversflow. A reward from God!  And God--with Him is the fairestreward.
196.Let it not delude thee, that the unbelievers go to and fro in the land;
197.a little enjoyment, then their refuge is Gehenna--an evil cradling!
198.But those who fear their Lord--for them shall be gardens underneath whichrivers flow, therein dwelling forever--a hospitality God Himself offers; andthat which is with God is better for the pious.
199.And some there are of the People of the Book who believe in God, and what hasbeen sent down unto you, and what has been sent down unto them, men humble toGod, not selling the signs of God for a small price; those--their wage iswith their Lord; God is swift at the reckoning.
200.O believers, be patient, and vie you in patience; be steadfast; fear God;haply so you will prosper.
%77% <4,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Mankind, fear your Lord, who created you of a single soul, and from itcreated its mate, and from the pair of them scattered abroad many men andwomen; and fear God by whom you demand one of another and the wombs; surelyGod ever watches over you.
2.Give the orphans their property, and do not exchange the corrupt for thegood; and devour not their property with your property; surely that is agreat crime.
3.If you fear that you will not act justly towards the orphans, marry suchwomen as seem good to you, two, three, four; but if you fear you will not beequitable, then only one, or what your right hands own; so it is likelieryou will not be partial.
4.And give the women their dowries as a gift spontaneous; but if they arepleased to offer you any of it, consume it with wholesome appetite.
5.But do not give to fools their property that God has assigned to you tomanage; provide for them and clothe them out of it, and speak to themhonourable words.
6.Test well the orphans, until they reach the age of marrying; then, if youperceive in them right judgment, deliver to them their property; consume itnot wastefully and hastily ere they are grown.If any man is rich, let him beabstinent; if poor, let him consume in reason.And when you deliver to themtheir property, take witnesses over them; God suffices for a reckoner.
%78% 7.To the men a share of what parents and kinsmen leave, and to the women ashare of what parents and kinsmen leave, whether it be little or much, ashare apportioned;
8.and when the division is attended by kinsmen and orphans and the poor,make provision for them out of it, and speak to them honourable words.
9.And let those fear who, if they left behind them weak seed, would be afraidon their account, and let them fear God, and speak words hitting the mark.
10.Those who devour the property of orphans unjustly, devour Fire in theirbellies, and shall assuredly roast in a Blaze.
11.God charges you, concerning your children: to the male the like of theportion of two females, and if they be women above two, then for themtwo-thirds of what he leaves, but if she be one then to her a half; and tohis parents to each one of the two the sixth of what he leaves, if he haschildren; but if he has no children, and his heirs are his parents, athird to his mother, or, if he has brothers, to his mother a sixth, afterany bequest he may bequeath, or any debt."Your fathers and your sons--youknow not which out of them is nearer in profit to you.So God apportions;surely God is All-knowing, All-wise.
%79% 12.And for you a half of what your wives leave, if they have no children; but ifthey have children, then for you of what they leave a fourth, after anybequest they may bequeath, or any debt. And for them a fourth of what youleave, if you have no children; but if you have children, then for them ofwhat you leave an eighth, after any bequest you may bequeath, or any debt.Ifa man or a woman have no heir direct, but have a brother or a sister, to eachof the two a sixth; but if they are more numerous than that, they shareequally a third, after any bequest he may bequeath, or any debt notprejudicial; a charge from God.God is All-knowing, All-clement.
13.Those are God's bounds.Whoso obeys God and His Messenger, He will admit himto gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever; that isthe mighty triumph.
14.But whoso disobeys God, and His Messenger, and transgresses His bounds, himHe will admit to a Fire, therein dwelling forever, and for him there awaits ahumbling chastisement.
%80% 15.Such of your women as commit indecency, call four of you to witness againstthem; and if they witness, then detain them in their houses until death takesthem or God appoints for them a way.
16.And when two men of you commit indecency, punish them both; but if theyrepent and make amends, then suffer them to be; God turns, and isAll-compassionate.
17.God shall turn only towards those who do evil in ignorance, then shortlyrepent; God will return towards those; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
18.But God shall not turn towards those who do evil deeds until, when one ofthem is visited by death, he says, `Indeed now I repent,' neither to thosewho die disbelieving; for them We have prepared a painful chastisement.
19.O believers, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will;neither debar them, that you may go off with part of what you have giventhem, except when they commit a flagrant indecency. Consort with themhonourably; or if you are averse to them, it is possible you may be averse toa thing, and God set in it much good.
%81% 20.And if you desire to exchange a wife in place of another , and you have givento one a hundredweight, take of it nothing. What, will you take it by way ofcalumny and manifest sin?
21.How shall you take it, when each of you has been privily with the other, andthey have taken from you a solemn compact?
22.And do not marry women that your fathers married, unless it be a thing of thepast; surely that is indecent and hateful, and evil way.
23.Forbidden to you are your mothers and daughters, your sisters, your auntspaternal and maternal, your brother's daughters, your sister's daughters,your mothers who have given suck to you, your suckling sisters, your wives'mothers, your stepdaughters who are in your care being born of your wives youhave been in to--but if you have not yet been in to them it is no fault inyou--and the spouses of your sons who are of your loins, and that you shouldtake to you two sisters together, unless it be a thing of the past;God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate;
%82% 24.and wedded women, save what your right hands own. So God prescribes for you.Lawful for you, beyond all that, is that you may seek, using your wealth, inwedlock and not in licence. Such wives as you enjoy thereby, give them theirwages apportionate; it is no fault in you in your agreeing together, afterthe due apportionate. God is All-knowing, All-wise.
25.And one of you who has not the affluence to be able to marry believingfreewomen in wedlock, let him take believing handmaids that your right handsown; God knows very well your faith; the one of you is as the other. Somarry them, with their people's leave, and give them their wages honourablyas women in wedlock , not as in licence or taking lovers. But when they arein wedlock, if they commit indecency, they shall be liable to half thechastisement of freewomen. That provision is for those of you who fearfornication; yet it is better for you to be patient. God is All-forgivingAll-compassionate.
26.God desires to make clear to you, and to guide you in the institutions ofthose before you, and to turn towards you; God is All-knowing,All-wise;
%83% 27.and God desires to turn towards you, but those who follow their lusts desireyou to swerve away mightily.
28.God desires to lighten things for you, for man was created a weakling.
29.O believers, consume not your goods between you in vanity, except there betrading, by your agreeing together. And kill not one another. Surely God iscompassionate to you.
30.But whosoever does that in transgression and wrongfully, him We shallcertainly roast at a Fire; and that for God is and easymatter.
31.If you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you, We will acquit youof your evil deeds, and admit you by the gate of honour.
32.Do not covet that whereby God in bounty has preferred one of you aboveanother. To the men a share from what they have earned, and to the women ashare from what they have earned. And ask God of Hisbounty; God knowseverything.
33.To everyone We have appointed heirs of that which parents and kinsmen leave,and those with whom you have sworn compact. So give to them their share; Godis witness over everything.
%84% 34.Men are the managers of the affairs of women for that God has preferred inbounty one of them over another, and for that they have expended of theirproperty. Righteous women are therefore obedient,guarding the secret for God's guarding. And those you fear may be rebelliousadmonish; banish them to their couches, and beat them. If they then obeyyou, look not for any way against them; God is All-high, All-great.
35.And if you fear a breach between the two, bring forth an arbiter from hispeople and from her people an arbiter, if they desire to set things right;God will compose their differences; surely God is All-knowing,All-aware.
36.Serve God, and associate naught with Him.Be kind to parents, and the near kinsman, and to orphans, and to the needy,and to the neighbour who is of kin, and tothe neighbour who is a stranger,and to the companion at your side, and to the traveller, and to that yourright hands own. Surely God loves not the proud and boastful
37.such as are niggardly, and bid other men to be niggardly, and themselvesconceal the bounty that God has given them. We have prepared for theunbelievers a humbling chastisement,
%85% 38.and such as expend of their substance to show off to men, and believe not inGod and the Last Day. Whosoever has Satan for a comrade, an evil comradeis he.
39.Why, what would it harm them, if they believed in God and the Last Day, andexpended of that God has provided them?  God knows them.
40.Surely God shall not wrong so much as the weight of an ant; and if it be agood deed He will double it, and give from Himself a mightywage.
41.How then shall it be, when We bring forward from everynation a witness, and bring thee to witness against those?
42.Upon that day the unbelievers, those who have disobeyed the Messenger, willwish that the earth might be levelledwith them; and they will not concealfrom God one tiding.
43.O believers, draw not near to prayer when you are drunken until you knowwhat you are saying, or defiled--unless you are traversing a way--until youhave washed yourselves; but if you are sick, or on a journey, or if any ofyou comes from the privy, or you have touched women, and you can find nowater, then have recourse to wholesome dust and wipe your faces and yourhands; God is All-pardoning, All-forgiving.
44.Hast thou not regarded those who were given a share of the Book purchasingerror, and desiring that you should also err from the way?%86% 45.God knows well your enemies; God suffices as a protector, God sufficesas a helper.46.Some of the Jews pervert words from their meanings saying, `We have heard andwe disobey' and `Hear, and be thou not given to hear' and `Observe us,'twisting with their tongues and traducing religion. If they had said, `Wehave heard and obey' and `Hear' and `Regard us', it would have been betterfor them, and more upright; but God has cursed them for their unbelief, sothey believe not except a few.47.You who have been given the Book, believe in what We have sent down,confirming what is with you, before We obliterate faces, and turn them upontheir backs, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-men Sabbath-breakers.,and God's command is done.
48.God forgives not that aught should be with Him associated; less than that Heforgives to whomsoever He will. Whoso associates with God anything, hasindeed forged a mighty sin.
49.Hast thou not regarded those who purify themselves?  Nay; only God purifieswhom He will; and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread.
50.Consider how they forge falsehood against God; and that suffices fora manifest sin.
51.Hast thou not regarded those who were given a share of the Book believing indemons and idols, and saying to the unbelievers, `These are more rightlyguided on the way than the believers'?
%87% 52.Those are they whom God has cursed; he whom God has cursed, thou wilt notfind for him any helper.
53.Or have they a share in the Kingdom?  If that is so, they do not give thepeople a single date-spot.
54.Or are they jealous of the people for the bounty that God has given them?Yet We gave the people of Abraham the Book and the Wisdom, and We gave thema mighty kingdom.
55.And some of them there are that believe, and some of them that bar from it;Gehenna suffices for a Blaze!
56.Surely those who disbelieve in Our signs--We shall certainly roast them ata Fire; as often as their skins are wholly burned, We shall give them inexchange other skins, that they may taste the chastisement. Surely God isAll-mighty, All-wise.
57.And those that believe, and do deeds of righteousness, them We shall admit togardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever and ever;therein for them shall be spouses purified, and We shall admit them to ashelter of plenteous shade.
58.God commands you to deliver trusts back to their owners; and when you judgebetween the people, that you judge with justice.Good is the admonition Godgives you; God is All-hearing, All-seeing.
59.O believers , obey God , and obey the Messenger and those in authority amongyou .If you should quarrel on anything, refer it to God and the Messenger,if you believe in God and the Last Day; that is better, and fairer inthe issue.
%88% 60.Hast thou not regarded those who assert that they believe in what has beensent down to thee, and what was sent down before thee, desiring to take theirdisputes to idols, yet they have been commanded to disbelieve in them?  ButSatan desires to lead them astray into far error.
61.And when it is said to them; `Come now to what God has sent down, and theMessenger,' then thou seest the hypocrites barring the way to thee .
62.How shall it be, when they are visitedby an affliction for what their own handshave forwarded, then they come to theeswearing by God, `We sought only kindness and conciliation'?
63.Those--God knows what is in their hearts;so turn away from them, and admonish them, and say to them penetrating wordsabout themselves.
64.We sent not ever any Messenger, but that he should be obeyed, by the leave ofGod. If, when they wronged themselves, they had come to thee, and prayedforgiveness of God, and the Messenger had prayed forgiveness for them, theywould have found God turns, All-compassionate.
65.But no, by the Lord!  they will not believe till they make thee the judgeregarding the disagreement between them, then they shall find in themselvesno impediment touching thy verdict, but shall surrender in fullsubmission.
%89% 66.But had We prescribed for them, saying, `Slay yourselves' or `Leave yourhabitations,' they would not have done it, save a few of them; yet if theyhad done as they were admonished it would have been better for them, andstronger confirming them,
67.and then We surely would have given them from Us a mighty wage,
68.and guided them on a straight path.
69.Whosoever obeys God, and the Messenger--they are with those whom God hasblessed, Prophets, just men, martyrs, the righteous; good companions they!
70.That is the bounty from God; God suffices as One who knows.
71.O believers, take your precautions; then move forward in companies, or moveforward all together.
72.Some of you there are that are dilatory; then, if an affliction visits you,he says, `God has blessed me, in that I was not a martyr with them.'
73.But if a bounty from God visits you, he will surely say, as if there hadnever been any affection between you and him, `Would that I had been withthem, to attain a mighty triumph!'
74.So let them fight in the way of God who sell the present life for the worldto come; and whosoever fights in the way of God and is slain, or conquers, Weshall bring him a mighty wage.
%90% 75.How is it with you, that you do not fight in the way of God, and for the men,women, and children who, being abased, say, `Our Lord, bring us forth fromthis city whose people are evildoers, and appoint to us a protector fromThee, and appoint to us from Thee a helper'?
76.The believers fight in the way of God, and the unbelievers fight in theidols' way. Fight you therefore against the friends of Satan; surely theguile of Satan is ever feeble.
77.Hast thou not regarded those to whom it was said, `Restrain your hands, andperform the prayer, and pay the alms'?   Then, as soon as fighting isprescribed for them, there is a party of them fearing the people as theywould fear God, or with a greater fear, and they say, `Our Lord, why hastthou prescribed fighting for us?  Why not defer us to a near term?'  Say:`The enjoyment of this world is little; the world to come is better for himwho fears God; you shall not be wronged a single date-thread.'
78.Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, though you should be inraised-up towers. And if a good thing visits them, they say, `This is fromGod'; but if an evil thing visits them , they say,' This is from thee.'Say:' Everything is from God.' How is it with this people ? They scarcelyunderstand any tiding.
79.Whatever good visits thee, it is of God; whatever evil visits thee is ofthyself. And We have sent thee to men a Messenger; God suffices for awitness.
%91% 80.Whosoever obeys the Messenger, thereby obeys God; and whosoever turns hisback--We have not sent thee to be a watcher over them.
81.They say, `Obedience'; but when they sally forth from thee, a party of themmeditate all night on other than what thou sayest. God writes down theirmeditations; so turn away from them, and put thy trust in God; God sufficesfor a guardian.
82.What, do they not ponder the Koran?   If it had been from other than Godsurely they would have found in it much inconsistency.
83.When there comes to them a matter, be it of security or fear, they broadcastit; if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority amongthem, those of them whose task it is to investigate would have known thematter. And but for the bounty of God to you, and His mercy, you wouldsurely have followed Satan, except a few.
84.So do thou fight in the way of God; thou art charged only with thyself.And urge on the believers; haply God will restrain the unbelievers' might;God is stronger in might, more terrible in punishing.
85.Whoso intercedes with a good intercession shall receive a share of it;whosoever intercedes with a bad intercession, he shall receive the like ofit; God has power over everything.
86.And when you are greeted with a greeting greet with a fairer than it, orreturn it; surely God keeps a watchful count over everything.
%92% 87.God--there is no god but He.He will surely gather you to the ResurrectionDay, no doubt of it. And who is truer in tidings than God ?
88.How is it with you, that you are two parties touching the hypocrites, and Godhas overthrown them for what they earned?  What, do you desire to guide himwhom God has led astray?  Whom God leads astray, thou wilt not find forhim a way.
89.They wish that you should disbelieve as they disbelieve, and then you wouldbe equal; therefore take not to yourselves friends of them, until theyemigrate in the way of God; then, if they turn their backs, take them,andslay them wherever you find them; take not to yourselves any one of them asfriend or helper
90.except those that betake themselves to a people who are joined with you by acompact, or come to you with breasts constricted from fighting with you orfighting their people. Had God willed, He would have given them authorityover you, and then certainly they would have fought you. If they withdrawfrom you, and do not fight you, and offer you peace, then God assigns not anyway to you against them.
91.You will find others desiring to be secure from you, and secure from theirpeople, yet whenever they are returned to temptation, they are overthrown init.If they withdraw not from you, and offer you peace, and restrain theirhands, take them, and slay them whereveryou come on them; against them We have given you a clear authority.
%93% 92.It belongs not to a believer to slay a believer, except it be by error.If any slays a believer by error, then let him set free a believing slave,and bloodwit is to be paid to his family unless they forgo it as a freewilloffering. If he belong to a people at enmity with you and is a believer, letthe slayer set free a believing slave. If he belong to a people joined withyou by a compact, then bloodwit is to be paid to his family and the slayershall set free a believing slave. But if he finds not the means, let himfast two successive months--God's turning; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
93.And whoso slays a believer wilfully, his recompense is Gehenna, thereindwelling forever, and God will be wroth with him and will curse him, andprepare for him a mighty chastisement.
94.O believers, when you are journeying in the path of God, be discriminating,and do not say to him who offers you a greeting, `Thou art not a believer,'seeking the chance goods of the present life. With God are spoils abundant.So you were aforetime; but God has been gracious to you.So bediscriminating; surely God is aware of the things you do.
%94% 95.Such believers as sit at home--unless they have an injury--are not theequals of those who struggle in the path of God with their possessions andtheir selves. God has preferred in rank those who struggle with theirpossessions and their selves over the ones who sit at home; yet to each Godhas promised the reward most fair; and God has preferred those who struggleover the ones who sit at home for the bounty of a mighty wage,
96.in ranks standing before Him, forgiveness and mercy; surely God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.
97.And those the angels take, while still they are wronging themselves--theangels will say, `In what circumstances were you?' They will say, `We wereabased in the earth.' The angels will say, `But was not God's earth wide, sothat you might have emigrated in it?' Such men, their refuge shall beGehenna--an evil homecoming!--
98.except the men, women, and children who, being abased, can devise nothingand are not guided to a way;
99.haply them God will yet pardon, for God is All-pardoning, All-forgiving.
100.Whoso emigrates in the way of God will find inthe earth many refuges andplenty; whoso goes forth from his house an emigrant to God and His Messenger,and then death overtakes him, his wage shall have fallen on God; surelyGod is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
101.And when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that youshorten the prayer, if you fear the unbelievers may afflict you; theunbelievers are for you a manifest foe.
%95% 102.When thou art amongst them, and performest for them the prayer, let a partyof them stand with thee, and let them take their weapons. When they bowthemselves, let them be behind you; and let another party who have not prayedcome and pray with thee, taking their precautions and their weapons. Theunbelievers wish that you should be heedless of your weapons and yourbaggage, then they would wheel on you all at once. There is no fault in you,if rain molests you, or you are sick, to lay aside your weapons; but takeyour precautions. God has prepared for the unbelievers a humblingchastisement.
103.When you have performed the prayer, remember God, standing and sitting andon your sides. Then, when you are secure, perform the prayer; surely theprayer is a timed prescription for the believers.
104.Faint not in seeking the heathen; if you are suffering, they are alsosuffering as you are suffering, and you are hoping from God for that forwhich they can not hope; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
105.Surely We have sent down to thee the Book with the truth, so that thou mayestjudge between the people by that God has shown thee. So be not an advocatefor the traitors;
%96% 106.and pray forgiveness of God; surely God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
107.And do not dispute on behalf of those who betray themselves; surely God lovesnot the guilty traitor.
108.They hide themselves from men, but hide not themselves from God; for He iswith them while they meditate at night discourse unpleasing to Him; Godencompasses the things they do.
109.Ha, there you are; you have disputed on their behalf in the present life; butwho willdispute with God on their behalf on the Resurrection Day, or whowill be a guardian for them?
110.Whosoever does evil, or wrongs himself, and then prays God's forgiveness, heshall find God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
111.And whosoever earns a sin, earns it against himself only; and God is everAll-knowing, All-wise.
112.And whosoever earns a fault or a sin and then casts it upon the innocent,thereby has laid upon himself calumny and manifest sin.
113.But for God's bounty to thee and His mercy a party of them purposed to leadthee astray; but they lead only themselves astray; they do not hurt thee inanything. God has sent down on thee the Book and the Wisdom, and He hastaught thee that thou knewest not; God's bounty to thee is ever great.
%97% 114.No good is there in much of their conspiring, except for him who bids tofreewill offering, or honour, or setting things right between the people.Whoso does that, seeking God's good pleasure, We shall surely give hima mighty wage.115.But whoso makes a breach with the Messenger after the guidance has becomeclear to him, and follows a way other than the believers', him We shall turnover to what he has turned to and We shall roast him in Gehenna Hell.--an evil homecoming!
116.God forgives not that aught should be with Him associated; less than that Heforgives to whomsoever He will. Whoso associates with God anything, has goneastray into far error.
117.In stead of Him, they pray not except to female beings; they pray not exceptto a rebel Satan
118.accursed by God. He said, `Assuredly I will take unto myself a portionappointed of Thy servants,
119.and I will lead them astray, and fill them with fancies, and I will commandthem and they will cut off the cattle's ears; I will command them and theywill alter God's creation.'  Whoso takes Satan to him for a friend, insteadof God, has surely suffered a manifest loss
120.He promises them and fills them with fancies, but there is nothing Satanpromises them except delusion.
121.Such men--their refuge shall be Gehenna, and they shall find no asylumfrom it.
%98% 122.But those that believe, and do deeds of righteousness, them We shall admit togardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling for ever and ever;God's promise in truth; and who is truer in speech than God?
123.It is not your fancies, nor the fancies of the People of the Book. Whosoeverdoes evil shall be recompensed for it, and will not find for him, apart fromGod, a friend or helper.
124.And whosoever does deeds of righteousness, be it male or female, believing--they shall enter Paradise, and not be wronged a single date-spot.
125.And who is there that has a fairer religion than he who submits his will toGod being a good-doer, and who follows the creed of Abraham, a man of purefaith?  And God took Abraham for a friend.
126.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth, and Godencompasses everything.
127.They will ask thee for a pronouncement concerning women. Say: `Godpronounces to you concerning them, and what is recited to you in the Bookconcerning the orphans women to whom you give not what is prescribed forthem, and yet desire to marry them, and the oppressed children, and that yousecure justice for orphans. Whatever good you do, God knows of it.'
%99% 128.If a woman fear rebelliousness or aversion in her husband, there is no faultin them if the couple set things right between them; right settlement isbetter; and souls are very prone to avarice.If you do good and aregodfearing, surely God is aware of the things you do.
129.You will not be able to be equitable between your wives, be you ever soeager; yet do not be altogether partial so that you leave her as it weresuspended. If you set things right, and are godfearing, God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.
130.But if they separate, God will enrich each of them of His plenty; God isAll-embracing, All-wise.
131.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. We have chargedthose who were given the Book before you, and you, `Fear God.' If youdisbelieve, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; Godis All-sufficient, All-laudable.
132.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; God sufficesfor a guardian.
133.If He will, He can put you away, O men, and bring others; surely God ispowerful over that.
134.Whoso desires the reward of this world, with God is the reward of this worldand of the world to come; God is All-hearing, All-seeing.
%100% 135.O believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God, even though it beagainst yourselves, or your parents and kinsmen, whether the man be rich orpoor; God stands closest to either.Then follow not caprice, so as to swerve;for if you twist or turn, God is aware of the things you do.
136.O believers, believe in God and His Messenger and the Book He has sentdown on His Messenger and the Book which He sent down before. Whosodisbelieves in God and His angels and His Books, and His Messengers, and theLast Day, has surely gone astray into far error.
137.Those who believe, and then disbelieve, and then believe, and thendisbelieve, and then increase in unbelief--God is not likely to forgive them,neither to guide them on any way.
138.Give thou good tidings to the hypocrites that for them awaits a painfulchastisement.
139.Those who take unbelievers for their friends instead of believers--do theyseek glory in them?  But glory altogether belongs to God.
140.He has sent down upon you in the Book: `When you hear God's signs beingdisbelieved and made mock of, do not sit with them until they plunge intosome other talk, or else you will surely be like to them.' God will gatherthe hypocrites and the unbelievers all in Gehenna.
%101% 141.Those who wait upon you and, if a victory comes to you from God, say, `Werewe not with you?' but if the unbelievers get a share, they say, `Did we notgain the mastery over you, and did we not defend you from the believers?' Godwill judge between you on the Resurrection Day, and God will not grant theunbelievers any way over the believers.
142.The hypocrites seek to trick God, but God is tricking them. When they standup to pray they stand up lazily, showing off to the people and notremembering God save a little;
143.wavering all the time--not to these, not to those and whom God leads astray,thou wilt not find for him a way.
144.O believers, take not the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers; ordo you desire to give God over you a clear authority ?
145.Surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest reach of the Fire; thou wilt notfind for them any helper;
146.save such as repent, and make amends, and hold fast to God, and make theirreligion sincerely God's those are with the believers, and God will certainlygive the believers a mighty wage.
147.What would God do with chastising you if you are thankful, and believe? Godis All-thankful, All-knowing.
%102% 148.God likes not the shouting of evil words unless a man has been wronged; Godis All-hearing, All-knowing.
149.If you do good openly or in secret or pardon an evil, surely God isAll-pardoning, All-powerful.
150.Those who disbelieve in God and His Messengers and desire to make divisionbetween God and His Messengers, and say, `We believe in part, and disbelievein part,' desiring to take between this and that a way--
151.those in truth are the unbelievers; and We have prepared for the unbelieversa humbling chastisement.
152.And those who believe in God and His Messengers and make no division betweenany of them, those--We shall surely give them their wages;God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
153.The People of the Book will ask thee to bring down upon them a Book fromheaven; and they asked Moses for greater than that, for they said, `Show usGod openly.'  And the thunderbolt took them for their evildoing. Then theytook to themselves the Calf, after the clear signs had come to them; yet Wepardoned them that, and We bestowed upon Moses a clear authority.
154.And We raised above them the Mount, taking compact with them; and We said tothem, `Enter in at the gate, prostrating'; and We said to them, `Transgressnot the Sabbath'; and Wetook from them a solemn compact.
%103% 155.So, for their breaking the compact, and disbelieving in the signs of God, andslaying the Prophets without right, and for their saying, `Our hearts areuncircumcised'--nay, but God sealed them for their unbelief, so they believenot, except a few--
156.and for their unbelief, and their uttering against Mary a mighty calumny,
157.and for their saying,' We slew the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, the Messengerof God'--yet they did not slay him, neither crucified him, only a likeness ofthat was shown to them. Those who are at variance concerning him surelyare in doubt regarding him; they have no knowledge of him, except thefollowing of surmise; and they slew him not of a certainty--
158.no indeed; God raised him up to Him; God is All-mighty, All-wise.
159.There is not one of the People of the Book but will assuredly believe in himbefore his death, and on the Resurrection Day he will be a witnessagainst them.
160.And for the evildoing of those of Jewry, We have forbidden them certain goodthings that were permitted to them, and for their barring from God'sway many,
161.and for their taking usury, that they were prohibited, and consuming thewealth of the people in vanity; and We have prepared for the unbelieversamong them a painful chastisement.
162.But those of them that are firmly rooted in knowledge, and the believersbelieving in what has been sent down to thee, and what was sent down beforethee, that perform the prayer and pay the alms, and those who believe in Godand the Last Day--them We shall surely give a mighty wage.
%104% 163.We have revealed to thee as We revealed to Noah, and the Prophets after him,and We revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes,Jesus and Job, Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and We gave to David Psalms,
164.and Messengers We have already told thee of before, and Messengers We havenot told thee of; and unto Moses God spoke directly--
165.Messengers bearing good tidings, and warning, so that mankind might have noargument against God, after the Messengers; God is All-mighty, All-wise.
166.But God bears witness to that He has sent down to thee; He has sent it downwith His knowledge; and the angels also bear witness; and God suffices fora witness.
167.Surely those who disbelieve, and bar from the way of God, have gone astrayinto far error.
168.Surely the unbelievers, who have done evil, God would not forgive them,neither guide them on any road
169.but the road to Gehenna, therein dwelling forever and ever; and that for Godis an easy matter.
170.O men, the Messenger has now come to you with the truth from your Lord; sobelieve; better is it for you. And if you disbelieve, to God belongs allthat is in the heavens and in the earth; and God is All-knowing,All-wise.
%105% 171.People of the Book, go not beyond the bounds in your religion, and say not asto God but the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only the Messengerof God, and His Word that He committed to Mary, and a Spirit from Him. Sobelieve in God and His Messengers, and say not, `Three.' Refrain; better isit for you. God is only One God. Glory be to Him--that He should have ason!  To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; Godsuffices for a guardian.
172.The Messiah will not disdain to be a servant of God, neither the angels whoare near stationed to Him. Whosoever disdains to serve Him, and waxesproud, He will assuredly muster them to Him, all of them.
173.As for the believers, who do deeds of righteousness, He will pay them in fulltheir wages, and He will give them more, of His bounty; and as for them whodisdain, and wax proud, them He will chastise with a painful chastisement,and they shall not find for them, apart from God, a friend or helper.
174.O men, a proof has now come to you from your Lord; We have sent down to you amanifest light.
175.As for those who believe in God, and hold fast to Him, He will surely admitthem to mercy from Him, and bounty, and will guide them to Him on astraight path.
%106% 176.They will ask thee for a pronouncement.Say: `God pronounces to youconcerning the indirect heirs. If a man perishes having no children, but hehas a sister, she shall receive a half of what he leaves, and he is her heirif she has no children. If there be two sisters, they shall receivetwo-thirds of what he leaves; if there be brothers and sisters, the maleshall receive the portion of two females. God makes clear to you, lest yougo astray; God has knowledge of everything.
<5,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O believers, fulfil your bonds.Permitted to you is the beast of the flocks, except that which is now recitedto you, so that you deem not game permitted to be hunted when you are inpilgrim sanctity. God decrees whatsoever He desires.
2.O believers, profane not God's waymarks nor the holy month, neither theoffering, nor the necklaces, nor those repairing to the Holy House seekingfrom their Lord bounty and good pleasure. But when you have quit yourpilgrim sanctity, then hunt for game. Let not detestation for a people whobarred you from the Holy Mosque move you to commit aggression. Help oneanother to piety and godfearing; do not help each other to sin and enmity.And fear God; surely God is terrible in retribution.
%107% 3.Forbidden to you are carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, what has beenhallowed to other than God, the beast strangled, the beast beaten down, thebeast fallen to death, the beast gored, and that devoured by beasts of prey--excepting that you have sacrificed duly--as also things sacrificed to idols,and partition by the divining arrows; that is ungodliness. Today theunbelievers have despaired of your religion; therefore fear them not, butfear you Me. Today I have perfected your religion for you, and I havecompleted My blessing upon you, and I have approved Islam for your religion.But whosoever is constrained in emptiness and not inclining purposely tosin--God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
4.They will question thee what is permitted them. Say: `The good things arepermitted you; and such hunting creatures as you teach, training them ashounds, and teaching them as God has taught you--eat what they seize for you,and mention God's Name over it. Fear God; God is swift at the reckoning.'
5.Today the good things are permitted you, and the food of those who were giventhe Book is permitted to you, and permitted to them is your food. Likewisebelieving women in wedlock, and in wedlock women of them who were given theBook before you if you give them their wages, in wedlock and not in licence,or as taking lovers. Whoso disbelieves in the faith, his work hasfailed, and in the world to come he shall be among the losers.
%108% 6.O believers, when you stand up to pray wash your faces, and your hands up tothe elbows , and wipe your heads, and your feet up to the ankles. If you aredefiled, purify yourselves; but if you are sick or on a journey, or if any ofyou comes from the privy, or you have touched women, and you can find nowater, then have recourse to wholesome dust and wipe your faces and yourhands with it. God does not desire to make any impediment for you; but Hedesires to purify you, and that He may complete His blessing upon you; haplyyou will be thankful.
7.And remember God's blessing upon you, and His compact which He made with youwhen you said,' We have heard and we obey.'  And fear you God; surely Godknows the thoughts in the breasts .
8.O believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God. Let notdetestation for a people move you not to be equitable; be equitable--that isnearer to godfearing. And fear God; surely God is aware of the thingsyou do.
9.God has promised those that believe, and do deeds of righteousness; theyshall have forgiveness and a mighty wage.
%109% 10.And the unbelievers, who cried lies to Our signs--they shall be theinhabitants of Hell.
11.O believers, remember God's blessing upon you, when a certain people purposedto stretch against you their hands, and He restrained their hands from you;and fear God; and in God let the believers put all their trust.
12.God took compact with the Children of Israel;and We raised up from among them twelvechieftains. And God said, `I am with you.Surely, if you perform the prayer, and paythe alms, and believe in My Messengers and succour them, and lend to Goda good loan, I will acquit you of your evil deeds, and I will admit youto gardens underneath which rivers flow. So whosoever of you thereafterdisbelieves, surely he has gone astray from the right way.'
13.So for their breaking their compact We cursed them and made their heartshard, they perverting words from their meanings; and they have forgotten aportion of that they were reminded of; and thou wilt never cease to lightupon some act of treachery on their part, except a few of them. Yet pardonthem, and forgive; surely God loves the good doers.
%110% 14.And with those who say `We are Christians' We took compact; and they haveforgotten a portion of that they were reminded of. So We have stirred upamong them enmity and hatred, till the Day of Resurrection; and God willassuredly tell them of the things they wrought.
15.People of the Book, now there has come to you Our Messenger, making clear toyou many things you have been concealing of the Book, and effacing manythings. There has come to you from God a light, and aBook Manifest
16.whereby God guides whosoever follows His good pleasure in the ways of peace,and brings them forth from the shadows into the light by His leave; and Heguides them to a straight path.
17.They are unbelievers who say, `God is the Messiah, Mary's son.' Say: `Whothen shall overrule God in any way if He desires to destroy the Messiah,Mary's son, and his mother, and all those who are on earth?'  For to Godbelongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth, and all that is betweenthem, creating what He will. God is powerful over everything.
%111% 18.Say the Jews and Christians `We are the sons of God, and His beloved ones.'Say: `Why then does He chastise you for your sins? No; you are mortals, ofHis creating; He forgives whom He will, and He chastises whom He will.' Forto God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth, and all that isbetween them; to Him is the homecoming.
19.People of the Book, now there has come to you Our Messenger, making thingsclear to you, upon an interval between the Messengers lest you should say,`There has not come to us any bearer of good tidings, neither any warner.'Indeed, there has come to you a bearer of good tidings and a warner; God ispowerful over everything.
20.And when Moses said to his people, `O my people, remember God's blessing uponyou, when He appointed among you Prophets, and appointed you kings, and gaveyou such as He had not given to any being.
21.O my people, enter the Holy Land which God has prescribed for you, and turnnot back in your traces, to turn about losers.'
22.They said, `Moses, there are people in it very arrogant; we will not enter ituntil they depart from it; if they depart from it then we will enter.'
23.Said two men of those that feared God whom God had blessed, `Enter againstthem the gate!  When you enterit, you will be victors. Put you all yourtrust in God, if you are believers.'
%112% 24.They said, `Moses, we will never enter it so long as they are in it.Goforth, thou and thy Lord, and do battle; we will be sitting here.'
25.He said, `O my Lord, I rule no one except myself and my brother.So do Thoudivide between us and the people of the ungodly.'
26.Said He, `Then it shall be forbidden them for forty years, while they arewandering in the earth; so grieve not for the people of the ungodly.'
27.And recite thou to them the story of the two sons of Adam truthfully,when they offered a sacrifice, and it was accepted of one of them, and notaccepted of the other.`I will surely slay thee,' said one. `God acceptsonly of the godfearing,' said the other.
28.`Yet if thou stretchest out thy hand against me, to slay me, I will notstretch out my hand against thee, to slay thee; I fear God, the Lord ofall Being.
29.I desire that thou shouldest be laden with my sin and thy sin, and so becomean inhabitant of the Fire; that is the recompense of the evildoers.'
30.Then his soul prompted him to slay his brother, and he slew him, and becameone of the losers.
31.Then God sent forth a raven, scratching into the earth, to show him how hemight conceal the vile body of his brother. He said, `Woe is me!  Am Iunable to be as this raven, and so conceal my brother's vile body?' And hebecame one of the remorseful.
%113% 32.Therefore We prescribed for the Children of Israel that whoso slays a soulnot to retaliate for a soul slain, nor for corruption done in the land, shallbe as if he had slain mankind altogether; and whoso gives life to a soul,shall be as if he had given life to mankind altogether. Our Messengers havealready come to them with the clear signs; then many of them thereaftercommit excesses in the earth.
33.This is the recompense of those who fight against God and His Messenger, andhasten about the earth, to do corruption there: they shall be slaughtered, orcrucified, or their hands and feet shall alternately be struckoff, or theyshall be banished from the land. That is a degradation for them in thisworld; and in the world to come awaits them a mighty chastisement,
34.except for such as repent, before you have power over them. So know you thatGod is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
35.O believers, fear God, and seek the means to come to Him, and struggle inHis way; haply you will prosper.
36.The unbelievers, though they possessed all that is in the earth, and thelike of it with it, to ransom themselves from the chastisement of the Day ofResurrection thereby, it would not be accepted of them; for them awaits apainful chastisement.
%114% 37.They will desire to come forth from the Fire, but they will not come forthfrom it; for them awaits a lasting chastisement.
38.And the thief, male and female: cut off the hands of both, as a recompensefor what they have earned, and a punishment exemplary from God; God isAll-mighty, All-wise.
39.But whoso repents, after his evildoing, and makes amends, God will turntowards him; God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
40.Knowest thou not that to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and theearth?  He chastises whom He will, and forgives whom He will; and God ispowerful over everything.
41.O Messenger, let them not grieve thee that vie with one another in unbelief,such men as say with their mouths `We believe' but their hearts believe not;and the Jews who listen to falsehood, listen to other folk, who have not cometo thee, perverting words from their meanings, saying, `If you are giventhis, then take it; if you are not given it, beware!'  Whomsoever Goddesires to try, thou canst not avail him anything with God. Those are theywhose hearts God desired not to purify; for them is degradation in thisworld; and in the world to come awaits them a mighty chastisement;
%115% 42.who listen to falsehood, and consume the unlawful.If they come to thee,judge thou between them, or turn away from them; if thou turnest away fromthem, they will hurt thee nothing; and if thou judgest, judge justly betweenthem; God loves the just.
43.Yet how will they make thee their judge seeing they have the Torah, whereinis God's judgment, then thereafter turn their backs? They are not believers.
44.Surely We sent down the Torah, wherein is guidance and light; thereby theProphets who had surrendered themselves gave judgment for those of Jewry,as did the masters and the rabbis, following such portion of God's Book asthey were given to keep and were witnesses to.So fear not men, but fear youMe; and sell not My signs for a little price. Whoso judges not according towhat God has sent down--they are the unbelievers.
45.And therein We prescribed for them: `A life for a life, an eye for an eye,a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and for woundsretaliation'; but whosoever forgoes it as a freewill offering, that shall befor him an expiation. Whoso judges not according to what God has sent down--they are the evildoers.
%116% 46.And We sent, following in their footsteps, Jesus son of Mary, confirmingtheTorah before him; and We gave to him the Gospel, wherein is guidance andlight, and confirming the Torah before it, as a guidance and an admonitionunto the godfearing.
47.So let the People of the Gospel judge according to what God has sent downtherein. Whosoever judges not according to what God has sent down-they are the ungodly.
48.And We have sent down to thee the Book with the truth, confirming the Bookthat was before it, and assuring it. So judge between them according to whatGod has sent down, and do not follow their caprices, to forsake the truththat has come to thee. To every one of you We have appointed a right wayand an open road. If God had willed, He would have made you one nation; butthat He may try you in what has come to you. So be you forward in goodworks; unto God shall you return, all together; and He will tell you of thatwhereon you were at variance.
49.And judge between them according to what God has sent down, and do not followtheir caprices, and beware of them lest they tempt theeaway from any of whatGod has sent down to thee. But if they turn their backs, know that Goddesires only to smite them for some sin they have committed; surely, many menare ungodly.
50.Is it the judgment of pagandom then that they are seeking?  Yet who is fairerin judgment than God, for a people having sure faith?
%117% 51.O believers, take not Jews and Christians as friends; they are friends ofeach other. Whoso of you makes them his friends is one of them. God guidesnot the people of the evildoers.
52.Yet thou seest those in whose hearts is sickness vying with one another tocome to them, saying, `We fear lest a turn of fortune should smite us.'  Butit may be that God will bring the victory, or some commandment from Him, andthen they will find themselves, for that they kept secret within them,remorseful,
53.and the believers will say, `What, are these the ones who swore by God mostearnest oaths that they were with you?  Their works have failed; now theyare losers.'
54.O believers, whosoever of you turnsfrom his religion, God will assuredlybring a people He loves, and who love Him, humble towards the believers,disdainful towards the unbelievers, men who struggle in the path of God, notfearing the reproach of any reproacher. That is God's bounty; He gives itunto whom He will; and God is All-embracing, All-knowing.
55.Your friend is only God, and His Messenger, and the believers who perform theprayer and pay the alms, and bow them down.
56.Whoso makes God his friend, and His Messenger, and the believers-the party ofGod, they are the victors.
57.O believers, take not as your friends those of them, who were given the Bookbefore you, and the unbelievers, who take your religion in mockery and as asport--and fear God, if you are believers--%118% 58.and when you call to prayer, take it in mockery and as a sport; that isbecause they are a people who have no understanding.59.Say: `People of the Book, do you blame us for any other cause than that webelieve in God, and what has been sent down to us, and what was sent downbefore, and that most of you are ungodly?'
60.Say: `Shall I tell you of a recompense with God, worse than that?  WhomsoeverGod has cursed, and with whom He is wroth, and made some of them apes andswine, and worshippers of idols--they are worse situated, and have gonefurther astray from the right way.'
61.When they come to you, they say, `We believe'; but they have entered inunbelief, and so they have departed in it; God knows very well what theywere hiding.
62.Thou seest many of them vying in sin and enmity, and how they consume theunlawful; evil is the thing they have been doing.
63.Why do the masters and the rabbis not forbid them to utter sin, and consumethe unlawful?  Evil is the thing they have been working.
64.The Jews have said, `God's hand is fettered.'  Fettered are their hands, andthey are cursed for what they have said. Nay, but His hands are outspread;He expends how He will. And what has been sent down to thee from thy Lordwill surely increase many of them in insolence and unbelief; and We have castbetween them enmity and hatred, till the Day of Resurrection.As often asthey light a fire for war, God will extinguish it .They hasten about theearth, to do corruption there; and God loves not the workers of corruption.
%119% 65.But had the People of the Book believed and been godfearing, We would haveacquitted them of their evil deeds, and admitted them toGardens of Bliss.
66.Had they performed the Torah and the Gospel, and what was sent down to themfrom their Lord, they would have eaten both what was above them, and what wasbeneath their feet. Some of them are a just nation; but many of them--evilare the things they do.
67.O Messenger, deliver that which has been sent down to thee from thy Lord; forif thou dost not, thou wilt not have delivered His Message.God will protectthee from men.God guides not the people of the unbelievers.
68.Say: `People of the Book, you do not stand on anything, until you performthe Torah and the Gospel, and what was sent down to you from your Lord.' Andwhat has been sent down to thee from thy Lord will surely increase many ofthem in insolence and  unbelief; so grieve not for the people of theunbelievers.
69.Surely they that believe, and those of Jewry, and the Sabaeans, and thoseChristians, whosoever believes in God and the Last Day, and worksrighteousness-- no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
70.And We took compact with the Children of Israel, and We sent Messengers tothem.Whensoever there came to them a Messenger with that their souls had notdesire for, some they cried lies to, and some they slew.
%120% 71.And they supposed there should be no trial; but blind they were, and deaf.Then God turned towards them; then again blind they were, many of them, anddeaf; and God sees the things they do.
72.They are unbelievers who say, `God is the Messiah, Mary's son.'  For theMessiah said, `Children of Israel, serve God, my Lord and your Lord. Verilywhoso associates with God anything, God shall prohibit him entrance toParadise, and his refuge shallbe the Fire; and wrongdoers shall have nohelpers.'
73.They are unbelievers who say, `God is the Third of Three.' No god is therebut One God. If they refrain not from what they say, there shall afflictthose of them that disbelieve a painful chastisement.
74.Will they not turn to God and pray His forgiveness?  God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
75.The Messiah, son of Mary, was only a Messenger; Messengers before him passedaway; his mother was a just woman; they both ate food. Behold, how We makeclear the signs to them; then behold, how they perverted are!
76.Say: `Do you serve, apart from God, that which cannot hurt or profit you?God is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.'
%121% 77.Say: `People of the Book, go not beyond thebounds in your religion, other than the truth,and follow not the caprices of a people who went astray before, and ledastray many, and now again have gone astray from the right way.'
78.Cursed were the unbelievers of the Children of Israel by the tongue of David,and Jesus, Mary's son; that, for their rebelling and their transgression.
79.They forbade not one another any dishonour that they committed; surely evilwere the things they did.
80.Thou seest many of them making unbelievers their friends. Evil is that theyhave forwarded to their account, that God is angered against them, and in thechastisement they shall dwell forever.
81.Yet had they believed in God and the Prophet and what has been sent down tohim, they would not have taken them as friends; but many of them areungodly.
82.Thou wilt surely find the most hostile of men to the believers are the Jewsand the idolaters; and thou wilt surely find the nearest of them in love tothe believers are those who say `We are Christians'; that, because some ofthem are priests and monks, and they wax not proud,
%122% 83.and when they hear what has been sent down to the Messenger, thou seest theireyes overflow with tears because of the truth they recognize. They say, `OurLord, we believe; so do Thou write us down among the witnesses.
84.Why should we not believe in God and the truth that has come to us, and beeager that our Lord should admit us with the righteous people?'
85.And God rewards them for what they saywith gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever;that is the recompense of the good-doers.
86.But those who disbelieve, and cry liesto Our signs-they are the inhabitants of Hell.
87.O believers, forbid not such good things as God has permitted you; andtransgress not; God loves not transgressors.
88.Eat of what God has provided you lawful and good; and fear God, in whomyou are believers.
89.God will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths; but He will take youto task for such bonds as you have made by oaths, whereof the expiation isto feed ten poor persons with the average of the food you serve to yourfamilies, or to clothe them, or to set free a slave; or if any finds not themeans, let him fast for three days. That is the expiation of your oaths whenyou have sworn; but keep your oaths. So God makes clear to you His signs;haply you will be thankful.
%123% 90.O believers, wine and arrow-shuffling, idols and divining-arrows are anabomination, some of Satan's work; so avoid it; haply so you willprosper.
91.Satan only desires to precipitate enmity and hatred between you in regard towine and arrow-shuffling, and to bar you from the remembrance of God, andfrom prayer. Will you then desist?
92.And obey God and obey the Messenger, and beware; but if you turn your backs,then know that it is only for Our Messenger to deliver theMessage Manifest.
93.There is no fault in those who believe and do deeds of righteousness whatthey may eat, if they are godfearing, and believe, and do deeds ofrighteousness, and then are godfearing and believe, and then are godfearingand do good; God loves the good-doers.
94.O believers, God will surely try you with something of the game that yourhands and lances attain, that God may know who fears Him in the Unseen.Whoso thereafter commits transgression, there awaits him a painfulchastisement.
95.O believers, slay not the game while you are in pilgrim sanctity; whosoeverof you slays it wilfully, there shall be recompense--the like of what he hasslain, in flocks as shall be judged by two men of equity among you, andoffering to reach the Kaaba; or expiation--food for poor persons or theequivalent of that in fasting, so that he may taste the mischief of hisaction. God has pardoned what is past; but whoever offends again, God willtake vengeance on him; God is All-mighty, Vengeful.
%124% 96.Permitted to you is the game of the sea and the food of it, as a provisionfor you and for the journeyers; but forbidden to you is the game of the land,so long as you remain in pilgrim sanctity; and fear God, unto whom you shallbe mustered.
97.God has appointed the Kaaba, the Holy House, as an establishment for men, andthe holy month, the offering, and the necklaces--that, that you may know thatGod knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth, and that God hasknowledge of everything.
98.Know God is terrible in retribution, and God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
99.It is only for the Messenger to deliver the Message; and God knows what youreveal and what you hide.
100.Say: `The corrupt and the good are not equal, though the abundance of thecorrupt please thee.'  So fear God, O men possessed of minds; haply so youwill prosper.
101.O believers, question not concerning things which, if they were revealed toyou, would vex you; yet if you question concerning them when the Koran isbeing sent down, they will be revealed to you.All-forgiving,All-clement.
102.A people before you questioned concerning them, then disbelieved in them.
103.God has not appointed cattle dedicated to idols, such as Bahira, Sa'iba,Wasila, Hami; but the unbelievers forge against God falsehood, and most ofthem have no understanding.
%125% 104.And when it is said to them, `Come now to what God has sent down, and theMessenger, they say, `Enough for us is what we found our fathers doing.'What, even if their fathers had knowledge of naught and were not guided?
105.O believers, look after your own souls. He who is astray cannot hurt you, ifyou are rightly guided. Unto God shall you return, all together, and He willtell you what you were doing.
106.O believers, the testimony between you when any of you is visited by death,at the bequeathing, shall be two men of equity among you; or two others fromanother folk, if you are journeying in the land and the affliction of deathbefalls you. Them you shall detain after the prayer, and they shall swear byGod, if you are doubtful, `We will not sell it for a price, even thoughit were a near kinsman, nor will we hide the testimony of God, for then wewould surely be among the sinful.'
107.But if it be discovered that both of them have merited the accusation of anysin, then two others shall stand in their place, these being the nearest ofthose most concerned, and they shall swear by God, `Our testimony is truerthan their testimony, and we have not transgressed, for then we wouldassuredly be among the evildoers.'
108.So it is likelier that they will bear testimony in proper form, or else theywill be afraid that after their oaths may be rebutted. Fear God, andhearken; God guides not the people of the ungodly.
%126% 109.The day when God shall gather the Messengers, and say, `What answer were yougiven?' They shall say, `We have no knowledge; Thou art the Knower of thethings unseen.'
110.When God said, `Jesus Son of Mary, remember My blessing upon thee and uponthy mother, when I confirmed thee with the Holy Spirit, to speak to men inthe cradle, and of age; and when I taught thee the Book, the Wisdom, theTorah, the Gospel; and when thou createst out of clay, by My leave, as thelikeness of a bird, and thou breathest into it, and it is a bird, by Myleave; and thou healest the blind and the leper by My leave, and thoubringest the dead forth by My leave;and when I restrained from thee the Children of Israel when thou camest untothem with the clear signs, and the unbelievers among them said, "This isnothing but sorcery manifest.
111."And when I inspired the Apostles: "Believe in Me and My Messenger"; theysaid, "We believe; witness Thou our submission." '
112.And when the Apostles said, `O Jesus son of Mary, is thy Lord able to senddown on us a Table out of heaven?' He said, `Fear you God, if you arebelievers.'
113.They said, `We desire that we should eat of it and our hearts be at rest;and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us, and that we may beamong its witnesses.'
%127% 114.Said Jesus son of Mary, `O God, our Lord, send down upon us a Table out ofheaven, that shall be for us a festival, the first and last of us,and a sign from Thee. And provide for us; Thou art the best of providers.'
115.God said, `Verily I do send it down on you; whoso of you hereafterdisbelieves, verily I shall chastise him with a chastisement wherewith Ichastise no other being.'
116.And when God said, `O Jesus son of Mary, didst thou say unto men,"Take me and my mother as gods, apart from God"?' He said, `To Thee beglory!  It is not mine to say what I have no right to. If I indeed said it,Thou knowest it, knowing what is within my soul, and I know not what iswithin Thy soul; Thou knowest the things unseen
117.I only said to them what Thou didst command me: "Serve God, my Lord andyour Lord."And I was a witness over them, while I remained among them;but when Thou didst take me to Thyself, Thou wast Thyself the watcher overthem; Thou Thyself art witness of everything.
118.If Thou chastisest them, they are Thy servants; if Thou forgivest them, Thouart the All-mighty, the All-wise.'
119.God said, `This is the day the truthful shall be profited by theirtruthfulness. For them await gardens underneath which rivers flow, thereindwelling forever and ever, God being well-pleased with them and theywell-pleased with Him; that is the mighty triumph.'
120.To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth, and all that isin them, and He is powerful over everything.
%128% <6,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Praise belongs to God who created the heavens and the earth and appointed theshadows and light; then the unbelievers ascribe equals to their Lord.
2.It is He who created you of clay, then determined a term and a term is statedwith Him ; yet thereafter you doubt.
3.He is God in the heavens and the earth; He knows your secrets, and what youpublish, and He knows what you are earning.4.Not a sign of their Lord comes to them, but they turn away from it.5.They cried lies to the truth when it came to them, but there shall come tothem news of that they were mocking.6.Have they not regarded how We destroyed before them many a generation Weestablished in the earth, as We never established you, and how We loosedheaven upon them in torrents, and made the rivers to flow beneath them? ThenWe destroyed them because of their sins, and raised up after them anothergeneration .7.Had We sent down on thee a Book on parchment and so they touched it withtheir hands, yet the unbelievers would have said, `This is naught butmanifest sorcery.'
8.`Why has an angel not been sent down on him?' they say; yet had We sent downan angel, the matter would have been determined, and then no respite would begiven them.
%129% 9.And had We made him an angel, yet assuredly We would have made him a man,and confused for them the thing which they themselves are confusing.
10.Messengers indeed were mocked at before thee; but those that scoffed at themwere encompassed by that they mocked at.
11.Say: `Journey in the land, then behold how was the end of them thatcried lies.'
12.Say: `To whom belongs what is in the heavens and in the earth?'Say: `It is God's.He has prescribed for Himself mercy.He will surely gatheryou to the Resurrection Day, of which is no doubt.Those who have lost theirsouls, they do not believe.
13.And to Him belongs whatsoever inhabits the night and the day; and He isthe All-hearing, the All-knowing.'
14.Say: `Shall I take to myself as protector other than God, the Originator ofthe heavens and of the earth, He who feeds and is not fed?'Say: `I havebeen commanded to be the first of them that surrender: "Be not thou of theidolaters." '
15.Say: `Indeed I fear, if I should rebel against my Lord, the chastisementof a dreadful day.'
16.From whomsoever it is averted on that day, He will have mercy on him; that isthe manifest triumph.
17.And if God visits thee with affliction none can remove it but He; and if Hevisits thee with good, He is powerful over everything.
18.He is Omnipotent over His servants, and He isthe All-wise, the All-aware.
%130% 19.Say: `What thing is greatest in testimony?'  Say: `God is witness between meand you, and this Koran has been revealed to me that I may warn you thereby,and whomsoever it may reach. Do you indeed testify that there are other godswith God?'  Say: `I do not testify.'  Say: `He is only One God, and I am quitof that you associate.'
20.Those to whom We have given the Book recognize it as they recognize theirsons. Those who have lost their own souls, they do notbelieve.
21.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie, or cries liesto His signs?  They shall not prosper, the evildoers.
22.And on the day when We shall muster them all together, then We shall say untothose who associated other gods with God, `Where are your associates whom youwere asserting?'
23.Then they shall have no proving, but to say, `By God our Lord, we neverassociated other gods with Thee.'
24.Behold how they lie against themselves, and how that which they were forginghas gone astray from them!
25.And some of them there are that listen to thee, and We lay veils upon theirhearts lest they understand it, and in their ears heaviness; and if they seeany sign whatever, they do not believe in it, so that when they come to theethey dispute with thee, the unbelievers saying, "This is naught but thefairy-tales of the ancient ones.'
26.And they forbid it, and keep afar from it, and it is only themselves theydestroy, but they are not aware.
27.If thou couldst see when they are stationed before the Fire, and they say,`Would that we might be returned, and then not cry lies to the signs of ourLord, but that we might be among the believers!'
%131% 28.No; that which they were concealing before has now appeared to them; and evenif they were returned, they would again commit the very thing they wereprohibited; they are truly liars.
29.And they say, `There is only our present life; we shall not be raised.'
30.If thou couldst see when they are stationed before their Lord!  He will say,`Is not this the truth?'  They will say, `Yes indeed, by our Lord!'  He willsay, `Then taste the chastisement for your unbelief.'
31.Lost indeed are they that cried lies to the encounter with God, so that whenthe Hour comes to them suddenly they shall say, `Also for us, that weneglected it!'  On their backs they shall be bearing their loads; O how evilthe Loads they bear !
32.The present life is naught but a sport and a diversion; surely the Last Abodeis better for those that are godfearing. What, do you not understand?
33.We know indeed that it grieves thee the things they say; yet it is not theethey cry lies to, but the evildoers--it is the signs of God that they deny.
34.Messengers indeed were cried lies to before thee, yet they endured patientlythat they were cried lies to , and were hurt, until Our help came unto them.No man can change the words of God; and there has already come to thee sometiding of the Envoys.
35.And if their turning away is distressful for thee, why, if thou canst seekout a hole in the earth, or a ladder in heaven, to bring them some sign--buthad God willed, He would have gathered them to the guidance; so be not thouone of the ignorant.
%132% 36.Answer only will those who hear; as for the dead, God will raise them up,then unto Him they will be returned.
37.They also say, `Why has no sign been sent down upon him from his Lord?'  Say:`Surely God is able to send down a sign, but most of them know not.'
38.No creature is there crawling on the earth, no bird flying with its wings,but they are nations like unto yourselves. We have neglected nothing in theBook; then to their Lord they shall be mustered.
39.And those who cry lies to Our signs are deaf and dumb, dwelling in theshadows. Whomsoever God will, He leads astray, and whomsoever He will, Hesets him on a straight path.
40.Say: `What think you? If God's chastisement comes upon you, or the Hour comesupon you, will you call upon any other than God if you speaktruly?'
41.No; upon Him you will call, and He will remove that for which you call uponHim if He will, and you will forget that you associate with Him.
42.Indeed We sent to nations before thee, and We seized them with misery andhardship that haply they might be humble;
43.if only, when Our might came upon them, they had been humble!  But theirhearts were hard, and Satan decked out fair to them what they were doing.
44.So, when they forgot what they were reminded of, We opened unto them thegates of everything until, when they rejoiced in what they were given, Weseized them suddenly, and behold, they were sore confounded.
%133% 45.Sothe last remnant of the people who did evil was cut off. Praise belongsto God the Lord of all Being.
46.Say: `What think you? If God seizes your hearing and sight, and sets a sealupon your hearts, who is a god other than God to give it back to you?'Behold how We turn about the signs!  Yet thereafter they are turning away.
47.Say: `What think you?  If God's chastisement comes upon you, suddenly oropenly, shall any be destroyed, except the people of the evildoers?'
48.We do not send the Envoys, except good tidings to bear, and warning; whoeverbelieves and makes amends--no fear shall be on them, neither shall theysorrow.
49.But those who cry lies to Our signs, them the chastisement shall visit, forthat they were ungodly.
50.Say: `I do not say to you, `I possess the treasuries of God';  I know notthe Unseen. And I say not to you, `I am an angel'; I only follow what isrevealed to me.'  Say:  `Are the blind and the seeing man equal?  Will younot reflect?'
51.And warn therewith those who fear they shall be mustered to their Lord; theyhave, apart from God, no protector and no intercessor; haply they will begodfearing.
52.And do not drive away those who call upon their Lord at morning and eveningdesiring His countenance; nothing of their account falls upon thee, andnothing of thy account falls upon them, that thou shouldst drive them away,and so become one of the evildoers.
%134% 53.Even so We have tried some of them by others that they may say, `Are thesethe ones God has been gracious to among us?'  Knows not God very well thethankful?
54.And when those who believe in Our signs come to thee, say, `Peace be uponyou.Your Lord has prescribed for Himself mercy. Whosoever of you does evilin ignorance, and thereafter repents and makes amends, He is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.'55.Thus We distinguish Our signs, that the sinners' way may bemanifest.56.Say: `I am forbidden to serve those you call on apart from God.'  Say: `I donot follow your caprices, or else I had gone astray, and would not be of theright-guided.'57.Say: `I stand upon a clear sign from my Lord, and you have cried lies to it.Not with me is that you seek to hasten; the judgment is God's alone. Herelates the truth, and He is the Best of deciders.'
58.Say: `If what you seek to hasten were with me, the matter between you and mewould be decided; and God knows very well the evildoers.'
59.With Him are the keys of the Unseen; none knows them but He.He knows what is in land and sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows it. Not agrain in the earth's shadows, not a thing, fresh or withered, but it is in abook Manifest.
%135% 60.It is He who recalls you by night, and He knows what you work by day;then He raises you up therein, that a stated term may be determined;then unto Him shall you return, then He will tell you of whatyou have been doing.
61.He is the Omnipotent over His servants. He sends recorders over you till,when any one of you is visited by death, Our messengers take himand they neglect not.
62.Then they are restored to God their Protector, the True. Surely His is thejudgment; He is the swiftest Of reckoners.
63.Say: `Who delivers you from the shadows of land and sea?  You call upon Himhumbly and secretly, "Truly, if Thou deliverest from these, we shall beamong the thankful." '
64.Say: `God delivers you from them and from every distress; then you assignHim associates.'
65.Say: `He is able to send forth upon you chastisement, from above you or fromunder your feet, or to confuse you in sects and to make you taste theviolence of one another.'  Behold how We turn about the signs ; haplythey will understand.
66.Thy people have cried it lies; yet it is the truth. Say: `I am not aguardian over you.
67.Every tiding has its time appointed; you will surely know.'
68.When thou seest those who plunge into Our signs, turn away from them untilthey plunge into some other talk; or if Satan should make thee forget, do notsit, after the reminding, with the people of the evildoers.
%136% 69.Nothing of their account falls upon those that are godfearing; but areminding; haply they will be godfearing.
70.Leave alone those who take their religion for a sport and a diversion, andwhom the present life has deluded. Remind hereby, lest a soul should begiven up to destruction for what it has earned; apart from God, it has noprotector and no intercessor; though it offer any equivalent, it shall notbe taken from it. Those are they who are given up to destruction for whatthey have earned; for them awaits a draught of boiling water and a painfulchastisement, for that they were unbelievers.
71.Say: `Shall we call, apart from God, on that which neither profits nor hurtsus, and shall we be turned back on our heels after that God has guided us?--Like one lured to bewilderment in the earth by Satans, though he has friendswho call him to guidance, `Come to us!'  Say: `God's guidance is the trueguidance, and we are commanded to surrender to the Lord of all Being,
72.and: "Perform the prayer, and fear Him; it is unto Him you shall bemustered." '
73.It is He who created the heavens and the earth in truth; and the day He says`Be', and it is; His saying is true, and His is the Kingdom the day theTrumpet is blown; He is Knower of the Unseen and the visible; He is theAll-wise, the All-aware.
%137% 74.And when Abraham said to his father Azar,`Takest thou idols for gods?  I see thee,and thy people, in manifest error.'
75.So We were showing Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and earth, that hemight be of those having sure faith.
76.When night outspread over him he saw a star and said, `This is my Lord.'But when it set he said, `I love not the setters.'
77.When he saw the moon rising, he said, `This is my Lord.' But when it set hesaid, `If my Lord does not guide me I shall surely be of the peoplegone astray.'
78.When he saw the sun rising, he said, `This is my Lord; this is greater!'But when it set he said,  `O my people, surely I am quit of that youassociate.
79.I have turned my face to Him who originated the heavens and the earth, a manof pure faith; I am not of the idolaters.'
80.His people disputed with him. He said, `Do you dispute with me concerningGod, and He had guided me?  I fear not what you associate with Him, except myLord will aught.My Lord embraces all things in His knowledge; will you notremember?
81.How should I fear what you have associated, seeing you fear not that you haveassociated with God that whereon He has not sent down on you any authority?'Which of the two parties has better title to security, if you have anyknowledge?
%138% 82.Those who believe, and have not confounded their belief with evildoing--tothem belongs the true security; they are rightly guided.
83.That is Our argument, which We bestowed upon Abraham as against his people.We raise up in degrees whom We will; surely thy Lord is All-wise,All-knowing.
84.And We gave to him Isaac and Jacob--each one We guided, And Noah We guidedbefore; and of his seed David and Solomon, Job and Joseph, Moses and Aaron--even so We recompense the good-doers--
85.Zachariah and John, Jesus and Elias; each was of the righteous;
86.Ishmael and Elisha, Jonah and Lot--each one We preferred above all beings;
87.and of their fathers, and of their seed, and of their brethren;and We elected them, and We guided them to a straight path.
88.That is God's guidance; He guides by it whom He will of His servants; hadthey been idolaters, it would have failed them, the things they did.
89.Those are they to whom We gave the Book, the Judgment, the Prophethood; so ifthese disbelieve in it, We have already entrusted it to a people who do notdisbelieve in it.
90.Those are they whom God has guided; so follow their guidance. Say: `I ask ofyou no wage for it; it is but a reminder unto all beings.'
%139% 91.They measured not God with His true measure when they said, `God has not sentdown aught on any mortal.'  Say: `Who sent down the Book that Moses broughtas a light and a guidance to men ? You put it into parchments, revealingthem, and hiding much; and you were taught that you knew not, you and yourfathers.' Say: `God.'  Then leave them alone, playing their gameof plunging.
92.This is a Book We have sent down, blessed and confirming that which wasbefore it, and for thee to warn the Mother of Cities and those about her; andthose who believe in the world to come believe in it, and watch overtheir prayers.
93.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie, or says, `Tome it has been revealed', when naught has been revealed to him, or he whosays, `I will send down the like of what God has sent down'?  If thou couldstonly see when the evildoers are in the agonies of death, and the angels arestretching out their hands: `Give up your souls!  Today you shall berecompensed with the chastisement of humiliation for what you said untrulyabout God, waxing proud against His signs.'
94.`Now you have come to Us one by one, as We created you upon the first time,and you have left what We conferred on you behind your backs. We do not seewith you your intercessors, those you asserted to be associates in you; thebond between you is now broken; that which you ever asserted has now goneastray from you.'
%140% 95.It is God who splits the grain and the date-stone, brings forth the livingfrom the dead; He brings forth the dead too from the living.So that then is God; then how are you perverted?
96.He splits the sky into dawn, and has made the night for a repose, and the sunand moon for a reckoning. That is the ordaining of the All-mighty, theAll-knowing.
97.It is He who has appointed for you the stars, that by them you might beguided in the shadows of land and sea. We have distinguished the signs fora people who know.
98.It is He who produced you from one living soul, and then a lodging-place,and then a repository. We have distinguished the signs for a people whounderstand.
99.It is He who sent down out of heaven water, and thereby We have brought forththe shoot of every plant, and then We have brought forth the green leaf ofit, bringing forth from it close-compounded grain, and out of the palm-tree,from the spathe of it, dates thick-clustered, ready to the hand, and gardensof vines, olives, pomegranates, like each to each, and each unlike to each.Look upon their fruits when they fructify and ripen!  Surely, in all this aresigns for a people who do believe.
100.Yet they ascribe to God, as associates, the jinn, though He created them; andthey impute to Him sons and daughters without any knowledge.Glory beto Him!
101.High be He exalted above what they describe!  The Creator of the heavens andthe earth--how should He have a son, seeing that He has no consort, and Hecreated all things, and He has knowledge of everything?
%141% 102.That then is God your Lord; there is no god but He, the Creator ofeverything. So serve Him, for He is Guardian over everything.
103.The eyes attain Him not, but He attains the eyes; He is the All-subtle,the All-aware.
104.Clear proofs have come to you from your Lord. Whoso sees clearly, it is hisown gain, and whoso is blind, it is to his own loss; I am not a watcherover you.
105.So We turn about the signs, that they may say, `Thou hast studied'; and thatWe may make it clear to a people having knowledge.
106.Follow thou what has been revealed to thee from thy Lord; there is no godbut He; and turn thou away from the idolaters.
107.Had God willed, they were not idolaters; and We have not appointed thee awatcher over them, neither art thou their guardian.
108.Abuse not those to whom they pray, apart from God, or they will abuse God inrevenge without knowledge. So We have decked out fair to every nationtheir deeds; then to their Lord they shall return, and He will tell themwhat they have been doing.
109.They have sworn by God the most earnest oaths if a sign comes to them theywill believe in it. Say: `Signs are only with God.`What will make yourealize that, when it comes, they will not believe?
110.We shall turn about their hearts and their eyes, even as they believed not init the first time; and We shall leave them in their insolence wanderingblindly.
%142% 111.Though We had sent down the angels to them, and the dead had spoken withthem, hadWe mustered against them every thing, face to face, yet they wouldnot have been the ones to believe, unless God willed; but most of them areignorant.
112.So We have appointed to every Prophet an enemy--Satans of men and jinnrevealing tawdry speech to each other, all as a delusion; yet, had thy Lordwilled, they would never have done it.
113.So leave them to their forging, and that the hearts of those who believe notin the world to come may incline to it, and that they may be well-pleasedwith it, and that they may gain what they are gaining.
114.What, shall I seek after any judge but God?  For it is He who sent down toyou the Book well-distinguished; and those whom We have given the Book knowit is sent down from thy Lord with the truth; so be not thou ofthe doubters.
115.Perfect are the words of thy Lord in truthfulness and justice; no man canchange His words; He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
116.If thou obeyest the most part of those on earth they will lead thee astrayfrom the path of God; they follow only surmise, merely conjecturing.
117.They Lord knows very well who goes astray from His path; He knows very wellthe right-guided.
118.Eat of that over which God's Name has been mentioned, if you believe inHis signs.
%143% 119.How is it with you, that you do not eat of that over which God's Name hasbeen mentioned, seeing that He has distinguished for you that He hasforbidden you, unless you are constrained to it?  But surely, many leadastray by their caprices, without any knowledge; thy Lord knows verywell the transgressors.
120.Forsake the outward sin, and the inward; surely the earners of sin shall berecompensed for what they have earned.
121.And eat not of that over which God's Name has not been mentioned; it isungodliness. The Satans inspire their friends to dispute with you; if youobey them, you are idolaters.
122.Why, is he who was dead, and We gave him life, and appointed for him a lightto walk by among the people as one whose likeness is in the shadows, andcomes not forth from them?  So it is decked out fair to the unbelieversthe things they have done.
123.And even so We appointed in every city great ones among its sinners, todevise there; but they devised only against themselves, and they were notaware.
124.And when a sign came to them, they said, `We will not believe until we aregiven the like of what God's Messengers were given. God knows very wellwhere to place His Message; and humiliation in God's sight shall befall thesinners, and a terrible chastisement, for what they devised.
%144% 125.Whomsoever God desires to guide, He expands his breast to Islam; whomsoeverHe desires to lead astray, He makes his breast narrow, tight as if he wereclimbing to heaven.So God lays abomination upon those whobelieve not.
126.This is the path of thy Lord; straight; We have distinguished the signs to apeople who remember.
127.Theirs is the abode of peace with their Lord, and He is their Protector forthat they were doing.
128.On the day when He shall muster them all together: `Company of jinn, you havemade much of mankind.'  Then their friends among mankind will say, `Our Lord,we have profited each of the other, and we have reached the term determinedby Thee for us.'  He will say: `The Fire is your lodging, therein to dwellforever'--except as God will; surely thy Lord is All-wise, All-knowing.
129.So We make the evildoers friends of each other for what they have earned.
130.`Company of jinn and mankind, did not Messengers come to you from among you,relating to you My signs and warning you of the encounter of this your day?'They shall say, `We bear witness against ourselves.'  They were deluded bythe present life, and they bear witness against themselves that they wereunbelievers.
131.That is because thy Lord would never destroy the cities unjustly, while theirinhabitants were heedless.
%145% 132.All have degrees according to what they have done; thy Lord is not heedlessof the things they do.
133.Thy Lord is All-sufficient, Merciful. If He will, He can put you away, andleave after you, to succeed you, what Hewill, as He produced you from theseed of another people.
134.The thing you are promised, that will surely come; you cannot frustrate it.
135.Say: `O my people, act according to your station; I am acting. And assuredlyyou will know who shall possess the Abode Ultimate. Surely the evildoerswill not prosper.'
136.They appoint to God, of the tillage and cattle that He multiplied, a portion,saying, `This is for God'--so they assert--`and this is for our associates.'So what is for their associates reaches not God; and what is for God reachestheir associates. Evil is their judgment!
137.Thus those associates of theirs have decked out fair to many idolaters toslay their children, to destroy them, and to confuse their religion for them.Had God willed, they would not have done so; so leave them to their forging.
%146% 138.They say, `These are cattle and tillage sacrosanct; none shall eat them, butwhom we will'--so they assert--`and cattle whose backs have been forbidden,and cattle over which they mention not theName of God.'All that they say, forging against God; He will assuredly recompense them forwhat they were forging.
139.And they say, `What is within the bellies of these cattle is reserved for ourmales and forbidden to our spouses; but if it be dead, then they all shall bepartners in it.'  He will assuredly recompense them for their describing;surely He is All-wise, All-knowing.
140.Losers are they who slay their children in folly, without knowledge, and haveforbidden what God has provided them, forging against God; they have goneastray, and are not right-guided.
141.It is He who produces gardens trellised, and untrellised, palm-trees, andcrops diverse in produce, olives, pomegranates, like each to each, and eachunlike to each. Eat of their fruits when they fructify, and pay the duethereof on the day of its harvest; and be not prodigal; God loves not theprodigal.
142.And of the cattle, for burthen and for slaughter, eat of what God hasprovided you; and follow not the steps of Satan; he is a manifest foetoyou.
%147% 143.Eight couples: two of sheep, of goats two. Say: `Is it the two males He hasforbidden or the two females?  Or what the wombs of the two females contain?Tell me with knowledge, if you speak truly.'
144.Of camels two, of oxen two. Say: `Is it the two males He has forbiddenor the two females?   Or what the wombs of the two females contain?Or were you witnesses when God charged you with this?  Then who does greaterevil than he who forges against God a lie, in order that he may lead mankindastray without any knowledge?  Surely God guides not the people of theevildoers.'
145.Say: `I do not find, in what is revealed to me, aught forbidden to him whoeats thereof except it be carrion, or blood outpoured, or the flesh ofswine-- that is an abomination--or an ungodly thing that has been hallowedto other than God; yet whoso is constrained, not desiring nor transgressing,surely thy Lord is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.'
146.And to those of Jewry We have forbidden every beast with claws; and of oxenand sheep We have forbidden them the fat of them, save what their backscarry, or their entrails, or what is mingled with bone; that We recompensedthem for their insolence; surely We speak truly.
%148% 147.So, if they cry thee lies, say: `Your Lord is of mercy all-embracing, and Hismight will never be turned back from the people of the sinners.'
148.The idolaters will say, `Had God willed, we would not have been idolaters,neither our fathers, nor would we have forbidden aught.'  Even so the peoplebefore them cried lies until they tasted Our might.
149.Say: `Have you any knowledge, for you to bring forth for us?  You follow onlysurmise, merely conjecturing.'
150.Say:  To God belongs the argument conclusive; for had He willed, He wouldhave guided you all.'  Say: `Produce your witnesses, those who testify Godhas forbidden this.'  Then if they testify, bear not witness with them; anddo not thou follow the caprices of those who cried lies to Our signs, andwho believe not in the world to come, and ascribe equals to theirLord.
151.Say: `Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you: that youassociate not anything with Him, and to be good to your parents, and not toslay your children because of poverty; We will provide you and them;and that you approach not any indecency outward or inward , and that you slaynot the soul God has forbidden, except by right. That then He has chargedyou with; haply you will understand.
%149% 152.And that you approach not the property of the orphan, save in the fairermanner, until he is of age. And fill up the measure and the balance withjustice. We charge not any soul save to its capacity. And when you speak,be just, even if it should be to a near kinsman. And fulfil God's covenant.That then He has charged you with; haply you will remember.
153.And that this is My path, straight; so do you follow it, and follow notdivers paths lest they scatter you from His path. That then He has chargedyou with; haply you will be godfearing.'
154.Then We gave Moses the Book, complete for him who does good, anddistinguishing every thing, and as a guidance and a mercy; haply they wouldbelieve in the encounter with their Lord.
155.This is a Book We have sent down, blessed; so follow it, and be godfearing;haply so you will find mercy;
156.lest you should say, `The Book was sent down only upon two parties before us,and we have indeed been heedless of their study';
157.or lest you say, `If the Book had been sent down upon us, we had surely beenmore rightly guided than they.'  Yet indeed a clear sign has come to you fromyour Lord, and a guidance and a mercy; and who does greater evil than he whocries lies to God's signs, and turns away from them?  We shall surelyrecompense those who turn away from Our signs with an evil chastisement fortheir turning away.
%150% 158.What, do they look for the angels to come to them, nothing less, or that thyLord should come, or that one of thy Lord's signs should come?  On the daythat one of thy Lord's signs comes it shall not profit a soul to believe thatnever believed before, or earned some good in his belief. Say: `Watch andwait; We too are waiting.'
159.Those who have made divisions in their religion and become sects, thou artnot of them in anything; their affair is unto God, then He will tell themwhat they have been doing.
160.Whoso brings a good deed shall have ten the like of it; and whoso brings anevil deed shall only be recompensed the like of it; they shall not bewronged.
161.Say: `As for me, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, a right religion,the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith; he was no idolater.'
162.Say: `My prayer, my ritual sacrifice, my living, my dying--all belongs toGod, the Lord of all Being.
163.No associate has He. Even so I have been commanded, and I am the first ofthose that surrender.'
164.Say: `Shall I seek after a Lord other than God, who is the Lord of allthings?' Every soul earns only to its own account; no soul laden bears theload of another. Then to your Lord shall you return, and He will tell you ofthat whereon you were at variance.
165.It is He who has appointed you viceroys in the earth, and has raised some ofyou in rank above others, that He may try you in what He has given you.Surely thy Lord is swift in retribution; and surely He is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
%151% <7,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim Sad
2.A Book sent down to thee--so let there be no impediment in thy breastbecause of it--to warn thereby, and as a reminder to believers:
3.Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and follow no friendsother than He; little do you remember.
4.How many a city We have destroyed!  Our might cameupon it at night, or while they took their ease in the noontide,
5.and they but cried, when Our might came upon them, `We wereevildoers.'
6.So We shall question those unto whom a Message was sent, and We shallquestion the Envoys,
7.and We shall relate to them with knowledge; assuredly We were not absent.
8.The weighing that day is true; he whose scales are heavy--they are theprosperers,
9.and he whose scales are light--they have lost their soulsfor wronging Our signs.
10.We have established you in the earth and there appointed for you livelihood;little thanks you show.
11.We created you, then We shaped you, then We said to the angels: `Bowyourselves to Adam'; so they bowed themselves, save Iblis--he was not ofthose that bowed themselves.
%152% 12.Said He, `What prevented thee to bow thyself, when I commanded thee?'Said he, `I am better than he; Thou createdst me of fire, and him Thoucreatedst of clay.'
13.Said He, `Get thee down out of it; it is not for thee to wax proud here,so go thou forth; surely thou art among the humbled.'
14.Said he, `Respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
15.Said He, `Thou art among the ones that are respited.'
16.Said he, `Now, for Thy perverting me, I shall surely sit in ambush for themon Thy straight path;
17.then I shall come on them from before them and from behind them, from theirright hands and their left hands; Thou wilt not find most of them thankful.'
18.Said He, `Go thou forth from it, despisedand banished. Those of them that follow thee--I shall assuredly fill Gehennawith all of you.'
19.`O Adam, inherit, thou and thy wife, the Garden, and eat of where you will,but come not nigh this tree, lest you be of the evildoers.'
20.Then Satan whispered to them, to reveal to them that which was hidden fromthem of their shameful parts. He said, `Your Lord has only prohibited youfrom this tree lest you become angels, or lest you becomeimmortals.'
21.And he swore to them, `Truly, I am for you a sincere adviser.'
22.So he led them on by delusion; and when they tasted the tree, their shamefulparts revealed to them, so they took to stitching upon themselves leaves ofthe Garden. And their Lord called to them, `Did not Iprohibit you from this tree, and say to you, "Verily Satan is for youa manifest foe"? '
%153% 23.They said, `Lord, we have wronged ourselves, and if Thou dost not forgive us,and have mercy upon us, we shall surely be among the lost.'
24.Said He, `Get you down, each of youan enemy to each. In the earth a sojourn shall be yours, and enjoymentfor a time.'
25.Said He, `Therein you shall live, and therein you shall die, and from thereyou shall be brought forth.'
26.Children of Adam!  We have sent down on you a garment to cover your shamefulparts, and feathers; and the garment of godfearing--that is better; that isone of God's signs; haply they will remember.
27.Children of Adam!  Let not Satan tempt you as he brought your parents out ofthe Garden, stripping them of their garments to show them their shamefulparts. Surely he sees you, he and his tribe, from where you see them not.We have made the Satans the friends of those who do not believe.
28.And whenever they commit an indecencythey say, `We found our fathers practising it,and God has commanded us to do it.'  Say: `God does not command indecency;what, do you say concerning God such things as you know not?'
29.Say: `My Lord has commanded justice.Set your faces in every place of worship and call on Him, making yourreligion sincerely His. As He originated you so you will return;
30.a part He guided, and a part justly disposed to error--they have taken Satansfor friends instead of God and think them guided.'
%154% 31.Children of Adam!  Take your adornment at every place of worship; and eatand drink, but be you not prodigal; He loves not the prodigal.
32.Say: `Who has forbidden the ornament of God which He brought forth for Hisservants, and the good things of His providing?' Say: `These, on the Day ofResurrection, shall be exclusively for those who believed in this presentlife. So We distinguish the signs for a people who know.'
33.Say: `My Lord has only forbidden indecencies, the inward and the outward, andsin, and unjust insolence, and that you associate with God that for which Hesent down never authority, and that you say concerning God such as youknow not.'
34.To every nation a term; when their term comes they shall not put it back by asingle hour nor put it forward.
35.Children of Adam!  If there should come to you Messengers from among you,relating to you My signs, then whosoever is godfearing and makes amends--no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
36.And those that cry lies to Our signs, and wax proud against them--those shall be the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
37.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie, or cries liesto His signs?  Those--their portion of the Book shall reach them; till, whenOur messengers come to them, to take them away, they say, `Where is that youwere calling on, beside God?' They will say, `They have gone astray from us,'and they will bear witness against themselves that they were unbelievers.
%155% 38.He will say, `Enter among nations that passed away before you, jinn andmankind, into the Fire.'  Whenever any nation enters, it curses itssister--nation; till, when they have all successively come there, the last ofthem shall say to the first of them, `O our Lord, these led us astray; sogive them a double chastisement of the Fire.'  He will say, `Unto each adouble, but you know not.'
39.The first of them shall say to the last of them, `You have no superiorityover us, then; so taste the chastisement for what you have been earning.'
40.Those that cry lies to Our signs and wax proud against them--the gates ofheaven shall not be opened to them, nor shall they enter Paradise until thecamel passes through the eye of the needle. Even so We recompensethe sinners;
41.Gehenna shall be their cradle, above them coverings. Even so We recompensethe evildoers.
42.And those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness--We charge not anysoul, save according to its capacity; those are the inhabitants of paradise,therein dwelling forever;
43.We shall strip away all rancour that is in their breasts; and underneath themrivers flowing; and they will say, `Praise belongs to God, who guided us untothis; had God not guided us, we had surely never been guided.Indeed, ourLord's Messengers came with the truth.' And it will be proclaimed: `This isyour Paradise; you have been given it as your inheritance for what you did.'
%156% 44.The inhabitants of Paradise will call to the inhabitants of the Fire:`We have found that which our Lord promised us true; have you found what yourLord promised you true?' `Yes,' they will say.And then a herald shallproclaim between them: `God's curse is on the evildoers
45.who bar from God's way, desiring to make it crooked, disbelieving inthe world to come.'
46.And between them is a veil, and on the Ramparts are men knowing each by theirmark, who shall call to the inhabitants of Paradise: `Peace be upon you!They have not entered it, for all their eagerness.'
47.And when their eyes are turned towards the inhabitants of the Fire they shallsay, `Our Lord, do not Thou assign us with the people of the evildoers.'
48.And the dwellers on the Battlements shall call to certain men they knowby their sign: `Your amassing has not availed you, neither yourwaxing proud.
49.Are these the ones that you swore God would never reach with mercy?'`Enter Paradise; no fear upon you, nor shall you sorrow.'
50.The inhabitants of the Fire shall call to the inhabitants of Paradise:`Pour on us water, or of that God has provided you!'They will say: `God has forbidden them to the unbelievers
51.who have taken their religion as a diversion and a sport, and whom thepresent life has deluded.'-- Therefore today We forget them as they forgotthe encounter of this their day, and that they denied Our signs.
%157% 52.And We have brought to them a Book that We have well distinguished,resting on knowledge, a guidance and a mercy unto a people that believe.
53.Do they look for aught else but its interpretation?  The day itsinterpretation comes, those who before forgot it shall say, `Indeed, ourLord's Messengers came with the truth.Have we then any intercessors tointercede for us, or shall we be returned, to do other than that we havedone?' They have indeed lost their souls, and that which they were forginghas gone astray from them.
54.Surely your Lord is God, who created the heavens and the earth in six days--then sat Himself upon the Throne, covering the day with the night it pursuesurgently--and the sun, and the moon, and the stars subservient, by Hiscommand. Verily, His are the creation and the command. Blessed be God, theLord of all Being.
55.Call on your Lord, humbly and secretly; He loves nottransgressors.
56.Do not corruption in the land, after it has been set right; and call on Himfearfully, eagerly--surely the mercy of God is nigh to the good-doers.57.It is He who looses the winds, bearing good tidings before His mercy,till, when they are charged with heavy clouds, We drive it to a dead landand therewith send down water, and bring forth therewith all the fruits.Even so We shall bring forth the dead; haply you will remember.%158% 58.And the good land-its vegetation comes forth by the leave of its lord, andthe corrupt--it comes forth but scantily. Even so We turn about the signsfor a people that are thankful.59.And We sent Noah to his people; and he said, `O my people, serve God!  Youhave no god other than He; truly, I fear for you the chastisementof a dreadful day.'60.Said the Council of his people, `We see thee in manifest error.'61.Said he, `My people, there is no error in me; but I am a Messenger fromthe Lord of all Being.62.I deliver to you the Messages of my Lord, and I advise yousincerely; for I know from God that you know not.
63.What, do you wonder that a reminder from your Lord should come to you by thelips of a man from among you?  That he may warn you, and you be godfearing,haply to find mercy.'
64.But they cried him lies; so We delivered him, and those with him, in the Ark,and We drowned those who cried lies to Our signs; assuredly they were a blindpeople.
65.And to Ad their brother Hood; he said, `O my people, serve God! You have nogod other than He; will you not be godfearing?'
66.Said the Council of the unbelievers of his people, `We see thee in folly, andwe think that thou art one of the liars.'
67.Said he, `My people, there is no folly in me; but I am a Messenger fromthe Lord of all Being.
%159% 68.I deliver to you the Messages of my Lord; I am your advisersincere, faithful.
69.What, do you wonder that a reminder from your Lord should come to youby the lips of a man from among you?  That he may warn you; and rememberwhen He appointed you as successors after the people of Noah, and increasedyou in stature broadly; remember God's bounties; haply you will prosper.'
70.They said, `Why, hast thou come to us that we may serve God alone, andforsake that our fathers served? Then bring us that thou promisest us, ifthou speakest truly.'
71.Said he, `Anger and wrath from your Lord have fallen upon you. What, do youdispute with me regarding names you have named, you and your fathers,touching which God has sent down never authority?  Then watch and wait; Ishall be with you watching and waiting.'
72.So We delivered him, and those with him, by a mercy from Us; and We cut offthe last remnant of those who cried lies to Our signs andwere not believers.
73.And to Thamood their brother Salih; he said, `O my people, serve God!You have no god other than He; there has now come to you a clear signfrom your Lord--this is the She-camelof God, to be a sign for you. Leave herthat she may eat in God's earth, and do nottouch her with evil, lest you be seized by a painful chastisement.
%160% 74.And remember when He appointed you successors after Ad, and lodged youin the land, taking to yourselves castles of its plains, and hewing itsmountains into houses. Remember God's bounties, and do not mischief in theearth, working corruption.'
75.Said the Council of those of his people who waxed proud to those that wereabased, to those of them who believed, `Do you know that Salih is an Envoyfrom his Lord?'  They said, `In the Message he has been sent with weare believers.'
76.Said the ones who waxed proud, `As for us, we are unbelievers in the thing inwhich you believe.'
77.So they hamstrung the She-camel and turned in disdain from the commandmentof their Lord, saying, `O Salih, bring us that thou promisest us, ifthou art an Envoy.'
78.So the earthquake seized them, and morning found them in their habitationfallen prostrate.
79.So he turned his back on them, and said, `O my people, I have delivered toyou the Message of my Lord, and advised you sincerely; but you do not lovesincere advisers.'
80.And Lot, when he said to his people, `What, do you commit such indecencyas never any being in all the world committed before you?
81.See, you approach men lustfully instead of women; no, you are a peoplethat do exceed.'
%161% 82.And the only answer of his people was that they said, `Expel them from yourcity; surely they are folk that keep themselves clean!'
83.So We delivered him and his family, except his wife; she was one ofthose that tarried.
84.And We rained down upon them a rain of stones.; so behold thou, how was theend of the sinners!
85.And to Midian their brother Shuaib; he said, `O my people, serve God! Youhave no god other than He; there has now come to you a clear sign from yourLord. So fill up the measure and the balance, and diminish not the goods ofthe people; and do not corruption in the land, after it has been set right;that is better for you, if you are believers.
86.And do not sit in every path, threatening and barring from God's way thosewho believe in Him, desiring to make it crooked. And remember when you werefew, and He multiplied you; and behold, how was the end of the workers ofcorruption.
87.And if there is a party of you who believe in the Message I have been sentwith, and a party who believe not, be patient till God shall judge betweenus; He is the best of judges.'
%162% 88.Said the Council of those of his people who waxed proud, `We will surelyexpel thee, O Shuaib, and those who believe with thee, from our city, unlessyou return into our creed.'  He said, `What, even though we detest it?
89.We should have forged against God a lie if we returned into your creed, afterGod delivered us from it. It is not for us to return into it, unless God ourLord so will. Our Lord embraces all things in His knowledge. In God we haveput our trust. Our Lord, give true deliverance between us and our people;Thou art the best of deliverers.'
90.Said the Council of those of his people who disbelieved, `Now, if you followShuaib, assuredly in that case you will be losers.'
91.So the earthquake seized them, and morning foundthem in their habitationfallen prostrate,
92.those who cried lies to Shuaib, as if never they dwelt there; those who criedlies to Shuaib, they were the losers.
93.So he turned his back on them, and said, `O my people, I have delivered toyou the Messages of my Lord, and advised you sincerely; how should I grievefor a people of unbelievers?'
94.We have sent no Prophet to any city but that We seized its people with miseryand hardship, that haply they might be humble;
95.then We gave them in the place of evil good, till they multiplied, and said,`Hardship and happiness visited our fathers.'  So We seized them suddenly,unawares.
%163% 96.Yet had the peoples of the cities believed and been godfearing, We would haveopened upon them blessings from heaven and earth; but they cried lies, and soWe seized them for what they earned.
97.Do the people of the cities feel secure Our might shall not come upon them atnight while they are sleeping?
98.Do the people of the cities feel secure Our might shall not come upon themindaylight while they are playing?
99.Do they feel secure against God's devising?  None feels secure against God'sdevising but the people of the lost.
100.Is it not a guidance to those who inherit the earth after those who inhabitedit that, did We will, We would smite them because of their sins, sealingtheir hearts so they do not hear?
101.Those cities We relate to thee tidings of; their Messengers came to them withthe clear signs, but they were not the ones to believe in that they had criedlies before; so God seals the hearts of the unbelievers.
102.We found no covenant in the most part of them; indeed, We found the most partof them ungodly .
103.Then We sent, after them, Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council,but they did them wrong; So behold thou, how was the end ofthe workers of corruption!
104.Moses said, `Pharaoh, I am a Messenger from the Lord of all Being,
%164% 105.worthy to say nothing regarding God except the truth. I have brought a clearsign to you from your Lord; so send forth withme the Children ofIsrael.'
106.Said he, `If thou hast brought a sign, produce it, if thou speakest truly.'
107.So he cast his staff; and behold, it was a serpent manifest.
108.And he drew forth his hand, and lo, it was white to the beholders.
109.Said the Council of the people of Pharaoh,`Surely this man is a cunning sorcerer
110.who desires to expel you from your land; what do you command?'
111.They said, `Put him and his brother off a while, and send among the citiesmusterers,
112.to bring thee every cunning sorcerer.'
113.And the sorcerers came to Pharaoh, saying,`We shall surely have a wage, if we should be the victors?'
114.He said, `Yes, indeed; and you shall be among the near-stationed.'
115.They said, `Moses, wilt thou cast, or shall we be the casters?'
116.He said, `You cast.' And when they cast they put a spell upon the people'seyes, and called forth fear of them, and produced a mighty sorcery.
117.And We revealed to Moses: `Cast thy staff.'  And lo, it forthwith swallowedup their lying invention.
118.So the truth came to pass, and false was proved what they were doing.
119.So they were vanquished there, and they turned about, humbled.
120.And the sorcerers were cast down, bowing themselves.
%165% 121.They said, `We believe in the Lord of all Being,
122.the Lord of Moses and Aaron.'
123.Said Pharaoh, `You have believed in Him before I gave you leave. Surely thisis a device you have devised in the city that you may expel its people fromit. Now you shall know!
124.I shall assuredly cut off alternately your hands and feet, then I shallcrucify you all together.'
125.They said, `Surely unto our Lord we are turning.
126.Thou takest vengeance upon us only because we have believed in the signsof our Lord when they came to us. Our Lord, pour out upon us patience, andgather us unto Thee surrendering.'
127.Then said the Council of the people of Pharaoh, `Wilt thou leave Moses andhis people to work corruption in the land, and leave thee and thy gods?' Saidhe, `We shall slaughter their sons and spare theirwomen; surely we aretriumphant over them!'
128.Said Moses to his people, `Pray for succour to God , and be patient; surelythe earth is God's and He bequeaths it to whom He will among His servants.The issue ultimate is to the godfearing.'
129.They said, `We have been hurt before thou camest to us, and after thou camestto us.' He said, `Perchance your Lord will destroy you enemy, and will makeyou successors in the land, so that He may behold how you shall do.'
130.Then seized We Pharaoh's people with years of dearth, and scarcity of fruits,that haply they might remember.
%166% 131.So, when good came to them, they said, `This belongs to us'; but if any evilsmote them, they would augur ill by Mosses and those with him. Why, surelytheir ill augury was with God; but the most of them knew not.
132.And they said, `Whatsoever sign thou bringest to us, to cast a spell upon us,we will not believe thee.'
133.So we let loose upon them the flood and the locusts, the lice and the frogs,the blood , distinct signs; but they waxed proud and were a sinful people.
134.And when the wrath fell upon them, they said, `Moses, pray to thy Lord for usby the covenant He has made with thee. If thou removest from us the wrath,surely we will believe thee, and send forth with thee theChildren of Israel.'
135.But when We removed from them the wrath unto a term that they should come to,lo, they broke their troth.
136.So We took vengeance on them, and drowned them in the sea, for that theycried lies to Our signs and heeded them not.
137.And We bequeathed upon the people that were abased all the east and the westof the land We had blessed; and perfectly was fulfilled the most fair word ofthy Lord upon the Children of Israel, for that they endured patiently; and Wedestroyed utterly the works of Pharaoh and his people, and what they had beenbuilding.
%167% 138.And We brought the Children of Israel over the sea, and they came upon apeople cleaving to idols they had. They said, `Moses, make for us a god, asthey have gods.'  Said he, `You are surely a people who are ignorant.
139.Surely this they are engaged upon shall be shattered, and void is whatthey have been doing.'
140.He said, `What, shall I seek a god for you other than God, who has preferredyou above all beings?'
141.And when We delivered you from the folk of Pharaoh who were visiting you withevil chastisement, slaying your sons, and sparing your women--and in that wasa grievous trial from your Lord.
142.And We appointed with Moses thirty nights and We completed them with ten, sothe appointed time of his Lord was forty nights; and Moses said to hisbrother Aaron, `Be my successor among my people, and put things right, and donot follow the way of the workers of corruption.'
143.And when Moses came to Our appointed time and his Lord spoke with him, hesaid, `Oh my Lord, show me, that I may behold Thee!'  Said He, `Thou shaltnot see Me; but behold the mountain--if it stays fast in its place, then thoushalt see Me.'  And when his Lord revealed Him to the mountain He made itcrumble to dust; and Moses fell down swooning. So when he awoke, he said,`Glory be to Thee!  I repent to Thee; I am the first of the believers.'
%168% 144.Said He, `Moses, I have chosen thee above all men for My Messages and MyUtterance; take what I have given thee, and be of the thankful.'
145.And We wrote for him on the Tablets of everything an admonition, and adistinguishing of everything: `So take it forcefully, and command thy peopleto take the fairest of it. I shall show you the habitation ofthe ungodly.
146.I shall turn from My signs those who wax proud in the earth unjustly; thoughthey see every sign, they will not believe in it, and though they see the wayof rectitude they will not take it for a way, and though they see the way oferror, they will take it for a way. That, because they have cried lies toOur signs and heeded them not.'
147.Those who cry lies to Our signs, and the encounter in the world to come--their works have failed; shall they be recompensed, except according to thethings they have done?
148.Andthe people of Moses took to them, after him, of their ornaments a Calf--a mere body that lowed. Did they not see it spoke not to them, neitherguided them upon any way?  Yet they took it to them, and were evildoers.
149.And when they smote their hands, and saw that they had gone astray, theysaid, `If our Lord has not mercy on us, and forgives us not, surely we shallbe of the lost.'
%169% 150.And when Moses returned to his people, angry and sorrowful, he said, `Evillyhave you done in my place, after me; what, have you outstripped your Lord'scommandment?'  And he cast down the Tablets, and laid hold of his brother'shead, dragging him to him. He Aaron said, `Son of my mother surely thepeople have abased me, and wellnigh slain me. Make not my enemies to gloatover me, and put me not among the people of the evildoers.'
151.He said, `O my Lord, forgive me and my brother and enter us into Thy mercy;Thou art the most merciful of the merciful.'
152.`Surely those who took to themselves the Calf--anger shall overtake them fromtheir Lord, and abasement in this present life; so We recompense those whoare forgers.
153.And those who do evil deeds, then repent thereafter and believe, surelythereafter thy Lord is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.'
154.And when Moses' anger abated in him, he took the Tablets; and mercy unto allthose who hold their Lord in awe.
155.And Moses chose of his people seventy men for Our appointed time; and whenthe earthquake seized them, he said, `My Lord, hadst Thou willed Thou wouldsthave destroyed them before, and me. Wilt Thou destroy us for what thefoolish ones of us have done?  It is only Thy trial, whereby Thou leadestastray whom Thou wilt, and guidest whom Thou wilt. Thou art our Protector;so forgive us, and have mercy on us, for Thou art the best of forgivers.
%170% 156.And prescribe for us in this world good, and in the world to come; we haverepented unto Thee.'  Said He, `My chastisement--I smite with it whom I will;and My mercy embraces all things, and I shall prescribe it for thosewho aregodfearing and pay the alms, and those who indeed believe in Our signs,
157.those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet of the common folk, whom theyfind written down with them in the Torah and the Gospel, bidding them tohonour, and forbidding them dishonour, making lawful for them the good thingsand making unlawful for them the corrupt things, and relieving them of theirloads, and the fetters that were upon them. Those who believe in him andsuccour him and help him, and follow the light that has been sent down withhim--they are the prosperers.'
158.Say: `O mankind, I am the Messenger of God to you all, of Him to whom belongsthe kingdom of the heavens and of the earth. There is no god but He. Hegives life, and makes to die. Believe then in God, and in His Messenger, theProphet of the common folk, who believes in God and His words, and followhim; haply so you will be guided.'
159.Of the people of Moses there is a nation who guide by the truth, and by itact with justice.
%171% 160.And We cut themup into twelve tribes, nations. And We revealed to Moses,when his people asked him for water: `Strike with thy staff the rock'; andthere gushed forth from it twelve fountains; all the people knew now theirdrinking-place. And We outspread the cloud to overshadow them, and We sentdown manna and quails upon them: `Eat of the good things wherewith We havesupplied you.'  And they worked no wrong upon Us, but themselvesthey wronged.
161.And when it was said to them, `Dwell in this township and eat of it whereveryou will; and say, Unburdening; and enter in at the gate, prostrating; Wewill forgive you your transgressions, and increase the good-doers.'
162.Then the evildoers of them substituted a saying other than that which hadbeen said to them; so We sent down upon them wrath out of heaven fortheir evildoing.
163.And question them concerning the township which was bordering the sea, whenthey transgressed the Sabbath, when their fish came to them on the day oftheir Sabbath, swimming shorewards, but on the day they kept not Sabbath,they came not unto them. Even so We were trying them for their ungodliness.
%172% 164.And when a certain nation of them said, `Why do you admonish a people God isabout to destroy or to chastise with a terrible chastisement?'  They said,`As an excuse to your Lord; and haply they will be godfearing.'
165.So, when they forgot that they were reminded of, We delivered those who wereforbidding wickedness, and We seized the evildoers with evil chastisement fortheir ungodliness.
166.And when they turned in disdain from that forbidding We said to them, `Be youapes, miserably slinking!'
167.And when thy Lord proclaimed He would send forth against them, unto the Dayof Resurrection, those who should visit them with evil chastisement. Surelythe Lord is swift in retribution; surely He is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
168.And We cut them up into nations in the earth, some of them righteous, andsome of them otherwise; and We tried them with good things and evil, thathaply they should return.
169.And there succeeded after them a succession who inherited the Book, takingthe chance goods of this lower world, and saying, `It will be forgiven us';and if chance goods the like of them come to them, they will take them. Hasnot the compact of the Book been taken touching them, that they should sayconcerning God nothing but the truth?  And they have studied what is in it;and the Last Abode is better for those who are godfearing. Do you notunderstand?
170.And those who hold fast to the Book, and perform the prayer--surely We leavenot to waste the wage of those who set aright.%173% 171.And when We shook the mountain above them as if it were a canop, and theysupposed it was about to fall on them: `Take forcefully what We have givenyou, and remember what is in it; haply you will be godfearing.'172.And when thy Lord took from the Children of Adam, from their loins, theirseed, and made them testify touching themselves, `Am I not your Lord?'  Theysaid, `Yes, we testify'--lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, `Asfor us, we were heedless of this,'
173.or lest you say, `Our fathers were idolaters aforetime, and we were seedafter them. What, wilt Thou then destroy us for the deeds of thevain-doers?'
174.So We distinguish the signs; and haply they will return.
175.And recite to them the tiding of him to whom We gave Our signs, but he castthem off, and Satan followed after him, and he became one of theperverts.
176.And had We willed, We would have raised him up thereby; but he inclinedtowards the earth and followed his lust. So the likeness of him is as thelikeness of a dog; if thou attackest it it lolls its tongue out, or if thouleavest it it lolls its tongue out. That is that people's likeness who criedlies to Our signs. So relate the story; haply they will reflect.
177.An evil likeness is the likeness of the people who cried lies to Our signs,and themselves were wronging.
178.Whomsoever God guides, he is rightly guided; and whom He leads astray--they are the losers.
%174% 179.We have created for Gehenna many jinn and men; they have hearts, butunderstand not with them; they have eyes, but perceive not with them. Theyare like cattle; nay, rather they are further astray. Those--they are theheedless.
180.To God belong the Names Most Beautiful; so call Him by them, and leave thosewho blaspheme His Names--they shall assuredly be recompensed for the thingsthey did.
181.Of those We created are a nation who guided by the truth, and by itact with justice.
182.And those who cry lies to Our signs We will draw them on little by littlewhence they know not;
183.and I respite them--assuredly My guile is sure.
184.Have they not reflected?  No madness is in their comrade; he is naught but aplain warner.
185.Or have they not considered the dominion of the heaven and of the earth, andwhat things God has created, and that it may be their term is already nigh?In what manner of discourse then will they after this believe?
186.Whomsoever God leads astray, no guide he has; He leaves them in theirinsolence blindly wandering.
187.They will question thee concerning the Hour, when it shall berth. Say: `Theknowledge of it is only with my Lord; none shall reveal it at its propertime, but He. Heavy is it in the heavens and the earth; it will not come onyou but--suddenly!'  They will question thee, as though thou artwell-informed of it. Say: `The knowledge of it is only with God, but mostmen know not.'
%175% 188.Say: `I have no power to profit for myself, or hurt, but as God will. Had Iknowledge of the Unseen I would have acquired much good, and evil would nothave touched me. I am only a warner, and a bearer of good tidings, to apeople believing.'
189.It is He who created you out of one living soul, and made of him his spousethat he might rest in her. Then, when he covered her, she bore a lightburden and passed by with it; but when it became heavy they cried to Godtheir Lord, `If Thou givest us a righteous son, we indeed shall be of thethankful.'
190.Thereafter, when He gave them a righteous son, they assigned Him associatesinthat He had given them; but God is high exalted above thatthey associate.
191.What, do they associate that which creates nothing and themselves arecreated,
192.and that have no power to help them, neither they help themselves?
193.If you call them to guidance they will not follow you; equal it is to youwhether you call them, or whether you are silent.
194.Those on whom you call apart from God, are servants the likes of you; callthem and let them answer you, if you speak truly.
195.What, have they feet wherewith they walk, or have they hands wherewith theylay hold, or have they eyes wherewith they see, or have they ears wherewiththey give ear?  Say: `Call you then to your associates; then try your guileon me, and give me no respite.
%176% 196.My Protector is God who sent down the Book, and He takes into His protectionthe righteous.
197.And those on whom you call, apart from God, have no power to help you,neither they help themselves.'
198.If you call them to the guidance they do not hear; and thou seest themlooking at thee, unperceiving.
199.Take the abundance, and bid to what is honourable, and turn away from theignorant.
200.If a provocation from Satan should provoke thee, seek refuge in God;He is All-hearing, All-seeing.
201.The godfearing, when a visitation of Satan troubles them, remember, and thensee clearly;
202.and their brothers they lead on into error, then they stop not short.
203.And when thou bringest them not a sign, they say, `Why hast thou not chosenone?'  Say: `I follow only what is revealed to me from my Lord; this is cleartestimony from your Lord, guidance, and mercy for a people of believers.'
204.And when the Koran is recited, give you ear to it and be silent;haply so you will find mercy.
205.Remember thy Lord in the soul, humbly and fearfully, not loud of voice,at morn and eventide. Be not thou among the heedless.
206.SUJDAH AYA @Surely those who are with thy Lord wax not too proud to serveHim; they chant His praise, and to Him they bow.
%177% <8,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.They will question thee concerning the spoils. Say: `The spoils belong toGod and the Messenger; so fear you God, and set things right between you, andobey you God and His Messenger, if you are believers.'
2.Those only are believers who, when God is mentioned, their hearts quake, andwhen His signs are recited to them, it increases them in faith, and in theirLord they put their trust,
3.those who perform the prayer, and expend of what We have provided them,
4.those in truth are the believers; they have degrees with their Lord, andforgiveness, and generous provision.
5.As thy Lord brought thee forth from thy house with the truth, and a part ofthe believers were averse to it,
6.disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become clear, as thoughthey were being driven into death with their eyes wide open.
7.And when God promised you one of the two parties should be yours, and youwere wishing that the one not accoutred should be yours; but God was desiringto verify the truth by His words, and to cut off the unbelievers to the lastremnant,
8.and that He might verify the truth and prove untrue the untrue, though thesinners were averse to it.
%178% 9.When you were calling upon your Lord for succour, and He answered you, `Ishall reinforce you with a thousand angels riding behind you.'
10.God wrought this not, save as good tidings and that your hearts thereby mightbe at rest; help comes only from God; surely God is All-mighty,All-wise.
11.When He was causing slumber to overcome you as a security from Him, andsending down on you water from heaven, to purify you thereby, and to put awayfrom you the defilement of Satan, and to strengthen your hearts, and toconfirm your feet.
12.When thy Lord was revealing to the angels, `I am with you; so confirm thebelievers.I shall cast into the unbelievers' hearts terror; so smite abovethe necks, and smite every finger of them!'
13.That, because they had made a breach with God and with His Messenger ; andwhosoever makes a breach with God and with His Messenger, surely God isterrible in retribution.
14.That for you; therefore taste it; and that the chastisement of the Fire isfor the unbelievers.
15.O believers, when you encounter the unbelievers marching to battle, turnnot your backs to them.
16.Whoso turns his back that day to them, unless withdrawing to fight againor removing to join another host, he is laden with the burden of God'sanger, and his refuge is Gehenna--an evil homecoming!
%179% 17.You did not slay them, but God slew them; and when thou threwest, it was notthyself that threw, but God threw, and that He might confer on the believersa fair benefit; surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
18.That for you; and that God weakens the unbelievers' guile.
19.If victory you are seeking, victory has already come upon you; and ifyou give over, it is better for you. But if you return, We shall return,and your host will avail you nothing though it be numerous; and that God iswith the believers.
20.O believers, obey God and His Messenger, and do not turn away from Him, evenas you are listening;
21.and be not as those who say, `We hear,' and they hear not.
22.Surely the worst of beasts in God's sight are those that are deaf and dumband do not understand.
23.If God had known of any good in them He would have made them hear; and ifHe had made them hear, they would have turned away, swerving aside.
24.O believers, respond to God and the Messengerwhen He calls you unto that which will give you life; and know that Godstands between a man and his heart, and that to Him you shall be mustered.
25.And fear a trial which shall surely not smite in particular the evildoersamong you; and know that God is terrible in retribution.
%180% 26.And remember when you were few and abased in the land, and were fearfulthat the people would snatch you away; but He gave you refuge, and confirmedyou with His help, and provided you with the good things, that haply youmight be thankful.
27.O believers, betray not God and the Messenger, and betray not your trustsand that wittingly;
28.and know that your wealth and your children are a trial, and that with God isa mighty wage.
29.O believers, if you fear God, He will assign you a salvation, and acquit youof your evil deeds, and forgive you; and God is of bounty abounding.
30.And when the unbelievers were devisingagainst thee, to confine thee, or slay thee,or to expel thee, and were devising, and God was devising; and God isthe best of devisers.
31.And when Our signs were being recited to them, they said, `We have alreadyheard; if we wished, we could say the like of this; this is naught but thefairy-tales of the ancients.'
32.And when they said, `O God, if this be indeed the truth from Thee, then raindown upon us stones out of heaven, or bring us a painful chastisement.'
33.But God would never chastise them, with thee among them; God would neverchastise them as they begged forgiveness.
%181% 34.But what have they now, that God should not chastise them, when they arebarring from the Holy Mosque, not being its protectors? Its only protectorsare the godfearing; but most of them know not.
35.And their prayer at the House is nothing but a whistling and a clapping ofhands--therefore taste you now the chastisement for yourunbelief!
36.The unbelievers expend their wealth to bar from God's way, and still theywill expend it, till it is an anguish for them, then be overthrown,and the unbelievers will be mustered into Gehenna,
37.that God may distinguish the corrupt from the good, and place the corruptone upon another, and so heap them up all together, and put them in Gehenna;those are the losers.
38.Say to the unbelievers, if they give over He will forgive them what is past;but if they return, the wont of the ancients is already gone !
39.Fight them, till there is no persecution and the religion is God's entirely;then if they give over, surely God sees the things they do;
40.but if they turn away, know that God is your Protector--and excellentProtector, and excellent Helper!
41.Know that, whatever booty you take, the fifth of it is God's and theMessenger's, and the near kinsman's, and the orphans', and for the needy, andthe traveller, if you believe in God and that We sent down upon Our servanton the day of salvation, the day the two hosts encountered; and God ispowerful over everything;
%182% 42.when you were on the nearer bank, and they were on the farther bank, and thecavalcade was below you; and had you made tryst together, you would havesurely failed the tryst; but that God might determine a matter that was done,that whosoever perished might perish by a clear sign, and by a clear sign hemight live who lived; and surely God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
43.When God showed thee them in thy dream as few ; and had He shown them as manyyou would have lost heart, and quarrelled about the matter; but God saved; Heknows the thoughts in the breasts.
44.When God showed you them in your eyes as few, when you encountered, and madeyou few in their eyes, that God might determine a matter that was done; andunto God all matters are returned.
45.O believers, whensoever you encounter a host, then stand firm, andremember God frequently; haply so you will prosper.
%183% 46.And obey God, and His Messenger, and do not quarrel together, and so loseheart, and your power depart; and be patient; surely God iswith the patient.
47.Be not as those who went forth from their habitations swaggering boastfullyto show off to men, and barring from God's way; and God encompassesthe things they do.
48.And when Satan decked out their deeds fair to them, and said, `Today no manshall overcome you, for I shall be your neighbour.`But when the two hostssighted each other, he withdrew upon his heels, saying, `I am quit of you;for I see what you do not see. I fear God; and God is terriblein retribution.'
49.When the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts was sickness, said, `Theirreligion has deluded them'; but whosoever puts his trust in God, surelyGod is All-mighty, All-wise.
50.If thou couldst only see when the angels take the unbelievers, beating theirfaces and their backs: `Taste the chastisement of the burning--
51.that, for what your hands have forwarded, and for that God is never unjustunto His servants.'
52.Like Pharaoh's folk, and the people before him, who disbelieved in God'ssigns; God seized them because of their sins; God is strong, terrible inretribution.
%184% 53.That is because God would never change His favour that He conferred on apeople until they changed what was within themselves; and that God isAll-hearing, All-knowing.
54.Like Pharaoh's folk, and the people before him, who cried lies to the signsof their Lord, so We destroyed them because of their sins, and We drowned thefolk of Pharaoh; and all were evildoers.
55.Surely the worst of beasts in God's sight are the unbelievers, who will notbelieve,
56.those of them with whom thou hast made compact then they break their compactevery time, not being godfearing.
57.So, if thou comest upon them anywhere in the wa, deal with them in such wiseas to scatter the ones behind them; haply they will remember.
58.And if thou fearest treachery any way at the hands of a people, dissolve itwith them equally; surely God loves not the treacherous.
59.And thou art not to suppose that they who disbelieve have outstripped Me;they cannot frustrate My will.
60.Make ready for them whatever force and strings of horses you can, to terrifythereby the enemy of God and your enemy, and others besides them that youknow not; God knows them. And whatsoever you expend in the way of God shallbe repaid you in full; you will not be wronged.
61.And if they incline to peace, do thou incline to it; and put thy trust inGod; He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
%185% 62.And if they desire to trick thee, God is sufficient for thee; He hasconfirmed thee with His help, and with the believers,
63.and brought their hearts together. Hadst thou expended all that is in theearth, thou couldst not have brought their hearts together; but God broughttheir hearts together; surely He is All-mighty, All-wise.
64.O Prophet, God suffices thee, and the believers who follow thee.
65.O Prophet, urge on the believers to fight. If there be twenty of you,patient men, they will overcome two hundred; if there be a hundred of you,they will overcome a thousand unbelievers, for they are a people whounderstand not.
66.Now God has lightened it for you, knowing that there is weakness in you.Ifthere be a hundred of you, patient men, they will overcome two hundred; ifthere be of you a thousand, they will overcome two thousand by the leave ofGod; God is with the patient.
67.It is not for any Prophet to have prisoners until he make wide slaughter inthe land. You desire the chance goods of the present world, and God desiresthe world to come; and God is All-mighty, All-wise.
68.Had it not been for a prior prescription from God, there had afflicted you,for what you took, a mighty chastisement.
69.Eat of what you have taken as booty, such as is lawful and good; and fearyou God; surely God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
%186% 70.O Prophet, say to the prisoners in your hands: `If God knows of any good inyour hearts He will give you better than what has been taken from you, and Hewill forgive you; surely God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.'
71.And if they desire treachery against thee, they have tricked God before; butHe has given thee power over them; and God is All-knowing, All-wise.
72.Those who believe, and have emigrated and struggled with their possessionsand their selves in the way of God  and those who have given refuge andhelp--those are friends one of another. And those who believe, but have notemigrated--you have no duty of friendship towards them till they emigrate;yet if they ask you for help, for religion's sake, it is your duty to helpthem, except against a people between whom and you there is a compact; andGod sees the things you do.
73.As for the unbelievers, they are friends one ofanother.Unless you do this, there will be persecution in the land and greatcorruption.
74.And those who believe, and have emigrated and struggled in the way of God.those who have given refuge and help--those in truth are the believers,and theirs shall be forgiveness and generous provision.
75.And those who have believed afterwards and emigrated, and struggled withyou--they belong to you; but those related by blood are nearer to oneanother in the Book of God; surely God has knowledge ofeverything.
%187% <9,1>
1.An acquittal, from God and His Messenger, unto the idolaters with whom youmade covenant:
2.`Journey freely in the land for four months; and know that you cannotfrustrate the will of God, and that God degrades the unbelievers.'
3.A proclamation, from God and His Messenger, unto mankind on the day ofthe Greater Pilgrimage: `God is quit, and His Messenger, of the idolaters.So if you repent, that will be better for you; but if you turn your backs,know that you cannot frustrate the will of God. And give thou good tidingsto the unbelievers of a painful chastisement;
4.excepting those of the idolaters with whom you made covenant, then theyfailed you naught neither lent support to any man against you. With themfulfil your covenant till their term; surely God loves the godfearing.
5.Then, when the sacred months are drawn away, slay the idolaters wherever youfind them, and take them, and confine them, and lie in wait for them at everyplace of ambush, But if they repent, and perform the prayer, and pay thealms, then let them go their way; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
6.And if any of the idolaters seeks of thee protection, grant him protectiontill he hears the words of God; then do thou convey him to his place ofsecurity--that, because they are a people who do not know.
%188% 7.How should the idolaters have a covenant with God and His Messenger?--excepting those with whom you made covenant at the Holy Mosque; so long asthey go straight with you, do you go straight with them; surely God lovesthe godfearing.
8.How?  If they get the better of you, they will not observe towards you anybond or treaty, giving you satisfaction with their mouths but in their heartsrefusing; and the most of them areungodly.
9.They have sold the signs of God for a small price, and have barred from Hisway; truly evil is that they have been doing,
10.observing neither bond nor treaty towards a believer; they are thetransgressors.
11.Yet if they repent, and perform the prayer, and pay the alms, then they areyour brothers in religion; and We distinguish the signs for a peoplewho know.
12.But if they break their oaths after their covenant and thrust at yourreligion, then fight the leaders of unbelief; they have no sacred oaths;haply they will give over.
13.Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and purposed to expel theMessenger, beginning the first time against you?  Are you afraid of them?You would do better to be afraid of God, if you are believers.
%189% 14.Fight them, and God will chastise them at your hands and degrade them, and Hewill help you against them, and bring healing to the breasts of a people whobelieve,
15.and He will remove the rage within their hearts; and God turns towardswhomsoever He will;God is All-knowing, All-wise
16.Or did you suppose you would be left in peace, and God knows not as yet thoseof you who have struggled, and taken not--apart from God and His Messengerand the believers--any intimate?  God is aware of what you do.
17.It is not for the idolaters to inhabit God's places of worship, witnessingagainst themselves unbelief; those--their works have failed them, and in theFire they shall dwell forever.
18.Only he shall inhabit God's places of worship who believes in God and theLast Day, and performs the prayer, and pays the alms, and fears none but Godalone; it may be that those will be among the guided.
19.Do you reckon the giving of water to pilgrims and the inhabiting of theHoly Mosque as the same as one who believes in God and the Last Day andstruggles in the way of God?  Not equal are they in God's sight; and Godguides not the people of the evildoers.
20.Those who believe, and have emigrated, and have struggled in the way of Godwith their possessions and their selves are mightier in rank with God; andthose--they are the triumphant;
%190% 21.their Lord gives them good tidings of mercy from Him and good pleasure; forthem await gardens wherein is lasting bliss,
22.therein to dwell forever and ever; surely with God is a mighty wage.
23.O believers, take not your fathers and brothers to be your friends, if theyprefer unbelief to belief; whosoever of you takes them for friends, those--they are the evildoers.
24.Say: `If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your clan, yourpossessions that you have gained, commerce you fear may slacken, dwellingsyou love--if these are dearer to you than God and His Messenger, and tostruggle in His way, then wait till God brings His command; God guides notthe people of the ungodly.'
25.God has already helped you on many fields, and on the day of Hunain, whenyour multitude was pleasing to you, but it availed you naught, and the landfor all its breadth was strait for you, and you turned about,retreating.
26.Then God sent down upon His Messenger His Shechinasakina:security,symbol.,and upon the believers, and He sent down legions you did not see, and Hechastised the unbelievers; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers;
%191% 27.then God thereafter turns towards whom He will; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
28.O believers, the idolaters are indeed unclean; so let them not come near theHoly Mosque after this year of theirs. If you fear poverty, God shall surelyenrich you of His bounty, if He will; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
29.Fight those who believe not in God and the Last Day and do not forbid whatGod and His Messenger have forbidden--such men as practise not the religionof truth, being of those who have been given the Book--until they pay thetribute out of hand and have been humbled.
30.The Jews say, `Ezra is the Son of God'; the Christians say, `The Messiah isthe Son of God.' That is the utterance of their mouths, conforming with theunbelievers before them. God assail them!  How they areperverted!
31.They have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from God, andthe Messiah, Mary's son--and they were commanded to serve but One God; thereis no god but He; glory be to Him, above that they associate--
%192% 32.desiring to extinguish with their mouths God's light; and God refuses but toperfect His light, though the unbelievers be averse.
33.It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion oftruth, that He may uplift it above every religion, though the unbelieversbe averse.
34.O believers, many of the rabbis and monks indeed consume the goods of thepeople in vanity and bar from God's way. Those who treasure up gold andsilver, and do not expend them in the way of God--give them the good tidingsof a painful chastisement,
35.the day they shall be heated in the fire of GehennaJahannum:Hell andtherewith their foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded:`This is the thing you have treasured up for yourselves; therefore taste younow what you were treasuring!'
36.The number of the months, with God, is twelve in the Book of God, the daythat He created the heavens and the earth; four of them are sacred. That isthe right religion. So wrong not each other during them. And fight theunbelievers totally even as they fight you totally; and know that God is withthe godfearing.
%193% 37.The month postponed is an increase of unbelief whereby the unbelievers goastray; one year they make it profane, and hallow it another, to agree withthe number that God has hallowed, and so profane what God has hallowed.Decked out fair to them are their evil deeds; and God guides not the peopleof the unbelievers.
38.O believers, what is amiss with you, that when it is said to you, `Go forthin the way of God,' you sink down heavily to the ground?  Are you so contentwith this present life, rather than the world to come?  Yet the enjoyment ofthis present life, compared with the world to come, is a little thing.
39.If you go not forth, He will chastise you with a painful chastisement, andinstead of you He will substitute another people; and you will not hurt Himanything, for God is powerful over everything.
40.If you do not help him, yet God has helped him already, when the unbelieversdrove him forth the second of two, when the two were in the Cave, when hesaid to his companion, `Sorrow not; surely God is with us.'  Then God sentdown on him His Shechina sakina:security,symbol., and confirmed him withlegions you did not see; and He made the word of the unbelievers the lowest;and God's word is the uppermost; God is All-mighty, All-wise.
%194% 41.Go forth, light and heavy!  Struggle in God's way with your possessions andyour selves; that is better for you, did you know.
42.Were it a gain near at hand, and an easy journey, they would have followedthee; but the distance was too far for them. Still they will swear by God,`Had we been able, we would have gone out with you,' so destroying theirsouls; and God knows that they are truly liars.
43.God pardon thee!  Why gavest thou them leave, till it was clear to thee whichof them spoke the truth, and thou knewest the liars?
44.Those who believe in God and the Last Day ask not leave of thee, that theymay struggle with their possessions and their selves; and God knows thegodfearing.
45.They only ask leave of thee who believe not in God and the Last Day, thosewhose hearts are filled with doubt, so that in their doubt they go this wayand that.
46.If they had desired to go forth, they would have made some preparation forit; but God was averse that they should be aroused, so He made them pause,and it was said to them, `Tarry you with the tarriers.'
47.Had they gone forth among you, they would only have increased you in trouble,and run to and fro in your midst, seeking to stir up sedition between you;and some of you would listen to them; and God knows the evildoers.
%195% 48.They sought to stir up sedition already before, and turned things upside downfor thee, until the truth came, and God's command appeared, though they wereaverse.
49.Some of them there are that say, `Give me leave and do not tempt me.'  Havenot such men fallen into temptation?  And surely Gehenna encompasses theunbelievers.
50.If good fortune befalls thee, it vexes them; but if thou art visited by anaffliction, they say, `We took our dispositions before,' and turn away,rejoicing.
51.Say: `Naught shall visit us but what God has prescribed for us; He is ourProtector; in God let the believers put all their trust.'
52.Say: `Are you awaiting for aught to come to us but one of the two rewardsmost fair?  We are awaiting in your case too, for God to visit you withchastisement from Him, or at our hands; so await; we are awaiting withyou.'
53.Say: `Expend willingly, or unwillingly, it shall not be accepted from you;you are surely a people ungodly.'
54.And naught prevents that their expendings should be accepted from them, butthat they believe not in God and His Messenger, and perform not the prayersave lazily, and that they expend not without they are averse.
%196% 55.So let not their possessions or their children please thee; Godonly desiresthereby to chastise them in this present life, and that their souls shoulddepart while they are unbelievers.
56.They swear by God that they belong with you, but they are not of you; theyare a people that are afraid.
57.If they could find a shelter, or some caverns, or any place to creep into,they would turn about and bolt away to it.
58.Some of them find fault with thee touching the freewill offerings; if theyare given a share of them they are well-pleased, but if they are given nonethen they are angry.
59.O were they well-pleased with what God and His Messenger have brought them,saying, `Enough for us is God; God will bring us of His bounty, and HisMessenger; to God we humbly turn.'
60.The freewill offerings are for the poor and needy, those who work to collectthem, those whose hearts are brought together, the ransoming of salves,debtors, in God's way, and the traveller; so God ordains; God is All-knowing,All-wise.
61.And some of them hurt the Prophet, saying, `He is an all ear!'  Say: `Anearof good for you he listens to what is best for you.; he believes in God,and believes the believers, and he is a mercy to the believers among you.Those who hurt God's Messenger--for them awaits a painful chastisement.'
%197% 62.They swear to you by God, to please you; but God and His Messenger--moreright is it they should please Him, if they are believers.
63.Do they not know that whosoever opposes God and His Messenger--for him awaitsthe fire of Gehenna Hell., therein to dwell forever?  That is the mightydegradation.
64.The hypocrites are afraid, lest a sura should be sent down against them,telling thee what is in their hearts. Say: `Mock on; God will bring forthwhat you fear.'
65.And if thou questionest them, then assuredly they will say, `We were onlyplunging and playing.'  Say: `What, then were you mocking God, and His signs,and His Messenger?
66.Make no excuses. You have disbelieved after your believing. If We forgiveone party of you, We will chastise another party for that they weresinners.'
67.The hypocrites, the men and the women, are as one another; they bid todishonour, and forbid honour; they keep their hands shut; they have forgottenGod, and He has forgotten them. The hypocrites - they are the ungodly.
68.God has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the unbelievers, the fireof Gehenna Hell., therein to dwell forever. That is enough for them;God has cursed them; and there awaits them a lasting chastisement.
%198% 69.Like those before you, who were stronger than you in might, and more abundantin wealth and children; they took enjoyment in their share; so do you takeenjoyment in your share, as those before you took enjoyment in their share.You have plunged as they plunged. Those--their works have failed in thisworld and in the world to come; those--they are the losers.
70.Has there not come to you the tidings of those who were before you--thepeople of Noah, Ad, Thamood, the people of Abraham, the men of Midian and thesubverted cities?  Their Messengers came to them with the clear signs; Godwould not wrong them, but themselves they wronged.
71.And the believers, the men and the women, are friends one of the other; theybid to honour, and forbid dishonour; they perform the prayer, and pay thealms, and they obey God and His Messenger. Those--upon them God will havemercy; God is All-mighty, All-wise.
72.God has promised the believers, men and women, gardens underneath whichrivers flow, forever therein to dwell, and goodly dwelling--places in theGardens of Eden; and greater, God's good pleasure; that is the mightytriumph.
%199% 73.O Prophet, struggle with the unbelievers and hypocrites, and be thou harshwith them; their refuge is Gehenna Hell.--and evil homecoming!
74.They swear by God that they said nothing, but they indeed said the word ofunbelief and disbelieved, after they had surrendered. They purposed whatthey never attained to, and they took revenge only that God enriched them,and His Messenger, of His bounty. So if they repent it will be better forthem; if they turn away God will chastise them with a painful chastisement inthis world and the next; on the earth they have no protector or helper.
75.And some of them have made covenant with God:  `If He gives us of His bounty,we will make offerings and be of the righteous.'
76.Nevertheless, when He gave them of His bounty they were niggardly of it, andturned away, swerving aside.
77.So as a consequence He put hypocrisy into their hearts, until the day theymeet Him, for that they failed God in that they promised Him and they wereliars.
78.Did they not know that God knows their secret and what they conspiretogether, and that God knows the things unseen?
79.Those who find fault with the believers who volunteer their freewillofferings, and those who find nothing but their endeavour they deride--Godderides them; for them awaits a painful chastisement.
%200% 80.Ask pardon for them, or ask not pardon for them; if thou askest pardon forthem seventy times, God will not pardon them; that, because they disbelievedin God and His Messenger; God guides not the people of theungodly.
81.Those who were left behind rejoiced in tarrying behind the Messenger of God,and were averse to struggle with their possessions and their selves in theway of God. They said, `Go not forth in the heat.'  Say: `Gehenna's Hell's.fire is hotter, did they but understand.'
82.Therefore let them laugh little, and weep much, in recompense for what theyhave been earning.
83.So, if God returns thee to a party of them and they ask leave of thee to goforth, say: `You shall not go forth with me ever, and you shall not fightwith me any enemy. You were well-pleased to tarry the first time, so nowtarry with those behind.'
84.And pray thou never over any one of them when he is dead, nor stand over hisgrave; they disbelieved in God and His Messenger, and died while they wereungodly.
85.And let not their possessions and their children please thee; God onlydesires thereby to chastise them in this present world, and that their soulsshould depart while they are unbelievers.
86.And when a sura is sent down, saying, `Believe in God, and struggle side byside with His Messenger,' the affluent among them ask leave of thee, saying,`Let us be with the tarriers.'
%201% 87.They are well-pleased to be with those behind, and a seal has been set upontheir hearts, so they understand not.
88.But the Messenger, and the believers with him, have struggled with theirpossessions and their selves, and those--for them await the good things;those--they are the prosperers.
89.God has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein todwell forever; that is the mighty triumph.
90.And the Bedouins came with their excuses, asking for leave; those who lied toGod and His Messenger tarried; there shall befall the unbelievers of them apainful chastisement.
91.There is no fault in the weak and the sick and those who find nothing toexpend, if they are true to God and to His Messenger. There is no wayagainst the good-doers--God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate--
92.neither against those who, when they cameto thee, for thee to provide.mounts for them, thou saidst to them, `I find not whereon to provide.mounts for you'; they turned away, their eyes overflowing with tears ofsorrow, because they found nothing to expend.
93.The way is open only against those who ask leave of thee, being rich; theyare well-pleased to be with those behind; God has set a seal on their hearts,so they know not.
%202% 94.They will excuse themselves to you, when you return to them. Say: `Do notexcuse yourselves; we will not believe you. God has already told us tidingsof you.God will surely see your work, and His Messenger, then you will bereturned to Him who knows the unseen and the visible, and He will tell youwhat you were doing.'
95.They will swear to you by God, when you turn back to them, that you may turnaside from them. So turn aside from them, for they are an abomination, andtheir refuge is Gehenna Hell.--a recompense for what they havebeen earning.
96.They will swear to you, that you may be well-pleased with them; but if youare well-pleased with them, God will surely not be well-pleased with thepeople of the ungodly.
97.The Bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy, and apter not toknow the bounds of what God has sent down on His Messenger; and God isAll-knowing, All-wise.
98.Some of the Bedouins take what they expend for a fine, and await the turns offortune to go against you. Theirs shall be the evil turn; God isAll-hearing, All-knowing.
99.And some of the Bedouins believe in God and the Last Day, and take what theyexpend for offerings bringing them near to God, and the prayers of theMessenger. Surely they are an offering for them, and God will admit theminto His mercy; God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
%203% 100.And the Outstrippers, the first of the Emigrants and the Helpers, and thosewho followed them in good-doing--God will be well-pleased with them and theyare well-pleased with Him; and He has prepared for them gardens underneathwhich rivers flow, therein to dwell forever and ever; that is the mightytriumph.
101.And some of the Bedouins who dwell around you are hypocrites; and some of thepeople of the City are grown bold in hypocrisy. Thou knowest them not; butWe know them, and We shall chastise them twice, then they will be returned toa mighty chastisement.
102.And other have confessed their sins; they have mixed a righteous deed withanother evil. It may be that God will turn towards them; God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.
103.Take of their wealth a freewill offering, to purify them and to cleanse themthereby, and pray for them; thy prayers are a comfort for them; God isAll-hearing, All-knowing.
104.Do they not know that God is He who accepts repentance from His servants, andtakes the freewill offerings, and that God--He turns, and isAll-compassionate ?
105.Say: `Work; and God will surely see your work, and His Messenger, and thebelievers, and you will be returned to Him who knows the unseen and thevisible, and He will tell you what you were doing.'
106.And others are deferred to God's commandment, whether He chastises them, orturns towards them; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
%204% 107.And those who have taken a mosque in opposition and unbelief, and to dividethe believers, and as a place of ambush for those who fought God and HisMessenger aforetime--they will swear `We desired nothing but good'; and Godtestifies they are truly liars.
108.Stand there never. A mosque that was founded upon godfearing from the firstday is worthier for thee to stand in; therein are men who love to cleansethemselves; and God loves those who cleanse themselves.
109.Why, is he better who founded his building upon the fear of God and His goodpleasure, or he who founded his building upon the brink of a crumbling bankthat has tumbled with him into the fire of Gehenna Hell.?  And God guidesnot the people of the evildoers.
110.The buildings they have built will not cease to be a point of doubt withintheir hearts, unless it be that their hearts are cut into pieces;God is All-knowing, All-wise.
111.God has bought from the believers their selves and their possessions againstthe gift of Paradise; they fight in the way of God; they kill, and arekilled; that is a promise binding upon God in the Torah, and the Gospel, andthe Koran; and who fulfils his covenant truer than God?  So rejoice in thebargain you have made with Him; that is the mighty triumph.
%204% 112.Those who repent, those who serve, those who pray, those who journey, thosewho bow, those who prostrate themselves, those who bid to honour and forbiddishonour, those who keep God's bounds--and give thou good tidings to thebelievers.
113.It is not for the Prophet and the believers to ask pardon for the idolaters,even though they be near kinsmen, after that it has become clear to them thatthey will be the in habitants of Hell.
114.Abraham asked not pardon for his father except because of a promise he hadmade to him; and when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of God, hedeclared himself quit of him; Abraham was compassionate, clement.
115.God would never lead a people astray after that He has guided them, until Hemakes clear to them as to what they should be godfearing; surely God knowseverything.
116.Surely to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth; He giveslife, and makes to die; and you have not, apart from God, either protectoror helper.
117.God has turned towards the Prophet and the Emigrants and the Helpers whofollowed him in the hour of difficulty, after the hearts of a part of themwellnigh swerved aside; then He turned towards them; surely He is Gentle tothem, and All-compassionate.
%206% 118.And to the three who were left behind, until, when the earth became straitfor them, for all its breadth, and their souls became strait for them, andthey thought that there was no shelter from God except in Him, then He turnedtowards them, that they might also turn; surely God turns, and isAll-compassionate.
119.O believers, fear God, and be with the truthful ones.
120.It is not for the people of the City and for the Bedouins who dwell aroundthem tostay behind God's Messenger, and to prefer their lives to his; thatis because they are smitten neither by thirst, nor fatigue, nor emptiness inthe way of God, neither tread they any tread enraging the unbelievers, norgain any gain from any enemy, but a righteous deed is thereby written totheiraccount; God leaves not to waste the wage of the good-doers.
121.Nor do they expend any sum, small or great, nor do they traverse any valley,but it is written to their account, that God may recompense them the bestof what they were doing.
122.It is not for the believers to go forth totally; but why should not a partyof every section of them go forth, to become learned in religion, and towarn their people when they return to them, that haply they may beware?
%207% 123.O believers, fight the unbelievers who are near to you, and let them find inyou a harshness; and know that God is with the godfearing.
124.Whenever a sura is sent down to thee, some of them say, `Which of you hasthis increased in belief?' As for the believers, them it has increased inbelief, and they are joyful.
125.But as for those in whose heart is sickness, them it has increased inabomination added to their abomination, and they have died while they wereunbelievers.
126.Do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice?  Yet still theydo not repent, nor do they remember.
127.And whenever a sura is sent down, they look one at another: `Does anyone seeyou?' Then they turn away. God has turned away their hearts, for that theyare a people who do not understand.
128.Now there has come to you a Messenger from among yourselves; grievous to himis your suffering; anxious is he over you, gentle to the believers,compassionate.
129.So if they turn their backs, say: `God is enough for me. There is no god butHe. In Him I have put my trust.He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.'
%208% <10,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam RaThose are the signs of the Wise Book.
2.Was it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man fromamong them:`Warn the people, and give thou good tidings to the believers that they havea sure footing with their Lord'? The unbelievers say, `This is a manifestsorcerer.'
3.Surely your Lord is God, who created the heavens and the earth in six days,then sat Himself upon the Throne, directing the affair.Intercessor there isnone, save after His leave.that then is God, your Lord; so serve Him .Willyou not remember?
4.To Him shall you return, all together--God's promise, in truth.Heoriginates creation, then He brings it back again that He may recompensethose who believe and do deeds of righteousness, justly.And those whodisbelieve--for them awaits a draught of boiling water, and a painfulchastisement, for their disbelieving.
5.It is He who made the sun a radiance, and the moon a light, and determined itby stations, that you might know the number of the years and the reckoning.God created that not save with the truth, distinguishing the signs to peoplewho know.
6.In the alternation of night and day, and what God has created in the heavensand the earth--surely there are signs for a godfearing people.
%209% 7.Surely those who look not to encounter Us and are well-pleased with thepresent life and are at rest in it, and those who are heedless of Our signs,
8.those--their refuge is the Fire, for that they have been earning.
9.Surely those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, their Lord willguide them for their belief; beneath them rivers flowing in gardens ofbliss;
10.their cry therein, `Glory to Thee, O God,' their greeting, `Peace,' and theircry ends, `Praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being.'
11. If God should hasten unto men evil as they would hasten good, their termwould be already decided for them.But We leave those, who look not toencounter Us, in their insolence wandering blindly.
12.When affliction visits a man, he calls Us on his side, or sitting, orstanding; but when We have removed his affliction from him, he passes on, asif he never called Us to an affliction that visited him.So deckedout fairto the prodigal is that they have been doing.
13.We destroyed the generations before you when they did evil, and theirMessengers came to them with the clear signs, but they would not believe; soWe recompense the people of the sinners.
14.Then We appointed you viceroys in the earth after them, that We might beholdhow you would do.
%210% 15.And when Our signs are recited to them, clear signs, those who look not toencounter Us say, `Bring a Koran other than this, or alter it.`Say:' It isnot for me to alter it of my own accord, I follow nothing, except what isrevealed to me Truly I fear, if I should rebel against my Lord, thechastisement of a dreadful day.'
16.Say: `Had God willed I would not have recited it to you, neither would Hehave taught you it; I abode among you a lifetime before it--will you notunderstand?'
17.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie, or cries liesto His signs? Surely the sinners do not prosper.
18.They serve, apart from God, what hurts them not neither profits them, andthey say, `These are our intercessors with God.' Say: `Will you tell Godwhat He knows not either in the heavens or in the earth?' Glory be to Him!High be He exalted above that they associate!
19.Mankind were only one nation, then they fell into variance.But for a wordthat preceded from thy Lord, it had been decided between them alreadytouching their differences.
20.They say, `Why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his Lord?' Say:`The Unseen belongs only to God.Then watch and wait; I shall be with youwatching and waiting.'
%211% 21. When We let the people taste mercy after hardship has visited them, lo, theyhave a device concerning Our sings.Say: `God is swifter at devising; surelyOur messengers are writing down what you are devising.'
22.It is He who conveys you on the land and the sea; and when you are in theship--and the ships run with them with a fair breeze, and they rejoice in it,there comes upon them a strong wind, and waves come on them from every side,and they think they are encompassed; they call upon God, making theirreligion His sincerely: `If Thou deliverest us from these, surely we shall beamong the thankful.'
23.Nevertheless when He has delivered them behold, they are insolent in theearth, wrongfully.O men, your insolence is only against yourselves; theenjoyment of this present life, then unto Us you shall return, then We shalltell you what you were doing.
24.The likeness of this present life is as water that We send down out ofheaven, and the plants of the earth mingle with it whereof men and cattleeat, till, when the earth has taken on its glitter and has decked itselffair, and its inhabitants think they have power over it, Our command comesupon it by night or day, and We make it stubble, as though yesterday itflourished not.Even so We distinguish the signs for a people who reflect.
25.And God summons to the Abode of Peace, and He guides whomsoever He will to astraight path;
%212% 26.to the good-doers the reward most fair and a surplus; neither dust norabasement shall overspread their faces.Those are the inhabitants ofParadise, therein dwelling forever.
27.And for those who have earned evil deeds the recompense of an evil deed shallbe the like of it; abasement shall overspread them, neither have they anydefender from God, as if their faces were covered with strips of nightshadowy.Those are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
28.And the day We shall muster them all, then We shall say to those whoassociate other gods with God: `Get you to your place, you and yourassociates!' Then We shall set a space between them, and their associateswill say, `Not us you were serving.
29.God is a sufficient witness between us and you; assuredly we were heedless ofyour service.'
30.There every soul shall prove its past deeds; and they shall be restored toGod, their Protector, the True, and there shall go astray from them that theywere forging.
31. Say: `Who provides you out of heaven and earth, or who possesses hearing andsight, and who brings forth the livingfrom the dead and brings forth thedead from the living, and who directs the affair?' They will surely say,`God' Then say: `Will you not be godfearing?'
32.That then is God, your Lord, the True; what is there, after truth, but error?Then how are you turned about?
33.Thus the word of thy Lord is realized against the ungodly that theybelieve not.
%213% 34.Say: `Is there any of your associates who originates creation, then brings itback again?' Say: `God--He originates creation, then brings it back again;so how are you perverted?'
35.Say: `Is there any of your associates who guides to the truth?' Say: `God--He guides to the truth; and which is worthier to be followed--He who guidesto the truth, or he who guides not unless he is guided? What then ails you,how you judge?'
36.And the most of them follow only surmise, and surmise avails naught againsttruth.Surely God knows the things they do.
37.This Koran could not have been forged apart from God; but it is aconfirmation of what is before it, and a distinguishing of the Book, whereinis no doubt, from the Lord of all Being.
38.Or do they say, `Why, he has forged it'? Say: `Then produce a sura like it,and call on whom you can, apart from God, if you speak truly.'
39.No; but they have cried lies to that whereof they comprehended not theknowledge, and whose interpretation has not yet come to them.Even so thosethat were before them cried lies; then behold how was the end of theevildoers!
40.And some of them believe in it, and some believe not in it.Thy Lord knowsvery well those who do corruption.
41.If they cry lies to thee, then do thou say: `I have my work, and you haveyour work; you are quit of what I do, and I am quit of what you do.'
42.And some of them give ear to thee; what, wilt thou make the deaf to hear,though they understand not?
%214% 43.And some of them look unto thee; what, wilt thou then guide the blind,though they do not see?
44.Surely God wrongs not men anything, but themselves men wrong.
45.And the day He shall muster them, as if they had not tarried but an hour ofthe day, mutually recognizing one another; lost will be those who cried liesto the encounter with God, and were not guided.
46. Whether We show thee unto Us, to Us they shall return; then God is witness ofthe things they do.
47.Every nation has its Messenger; then, when their Messenger comes, justlythe issue is decided between them, and they are not wronged.
48.They say, `When will this promise be, if you speak truly?'
49.Say: `I have no power to profit for myself, or hurt, but as God will.Toevery nation a term; when their term comes they shall not put it back by asingle hour nor put it forward.'
50.Say: `Have you considered? If His chastisement comes upon you by night orday, what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten?
51.What, when it has come to pass, will you then believe in it? Now, whenalready you seek to hasten it!'
52.Then it will be said to the evildoers: `Taste the chastisement of eternity!Are you recompensed for aught but that you have been earning?'
53.They ask thee to tell them, `Is it true?' Say: `Yes, by my Lord! It is true;you cannot frustrate Him.'
%215% 54.If every soul that has done evil possessed all that is in the earth, he wouldoffer it for his ransom; and they will be secretly remorseful when they seethe chastisement, and justly the issue is decided between them, and they arenot wronged.
55.Why, surely to God belongs everything that is in the heavens and earth.Why,surely God's promise is true; but the most of them have noknowledge.
56.He gives life, and makes to die, and to Him you shall be returned.
57.O men, now there has come to you an admonition from your Lord, and a healingfor what is in the breasts, and a guidance, and a mercy to the believers.
58.Say: `In the bounty of God, and His mercy--in that let them rejoice; it isbetter than that they amass.'
59.Say: `Have you considered the provision God has sent down for you, and youhave made some of it unlawful, and some lawful?' Say: `Has God given youleave, or do you forge against God?'
60.What will they think, who forge falsehood against God, on the Day ofResurrection? God is bountiful to men; but most of them are notthankful.
61.Thou art not upon any occupation, neither recitest thou any Koran of it,nor do you any work, without that We are witnesses over you when you presson it; and not so much as the weight of an ant in earth or heaven escapesfrom thy Lord; neither is aught smaller than that or greater, but in aManifest Book.
%216% 62.Surely God's friends--no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
63.Those who believe, and are godfearing--
64.for them is good tidings in the present life and in the world to come.Thereis no changing the words of God; that is the mighty triumph.
65.And do not let their saying grieve thee; the glory belongs altogether to God;He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
66.Why, surely to God belongs everyone that is in the heavens and in the earth;they follow, who call upon associates, apart from God--they follow nothingbut surmise, merely conjecturing.
67.It is He who made for you the night to repose in it, and the day, to see;surely in that are signs for a people who have ears.
68.They say, `God has taken to Him a son.' Glory be to Him! He isAll-sufficient; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth;you have no authority for this.What, do you say concerning God that youknow not?
69.Say: `Those who forge against God falsehood shall not prosper.'
70.Some enjoyment in this world; then unto Us they shall return; then We shalllet them taste the terrible chastisement, for that they wereunbelievers.
%217% 71. And recite to them the story of Noah when he said to his people, `My people,if my standing here is grievous to you and my reminding you of the signs ofGod, in God have I put my trust; so resolve on your affair, with yourassociates, then let not your affair be a worry to you, but make decisionunto me, and respite me not.
72.Then if you turn your backs, I have not asked you for any wage; my wagefalls only on God, and I have been commanded to be of those thatsurrender.'
73.But they cried him lies; so We delivered him, and those with him, in the Ark,and We appointed them as viceroys, and We drowned those who cried lies to Oursigns; then behold how was the end of them that were warned!
74.Then We sent forth, after him, Messengers to their people, and they broughtthem the clear signs; but they were not men to believe in that they had criedlies to before.So We seal the hearts of the transgressors.
75.Then We sent forth, after them, Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his Councilwith Our signs, but they waxed proud, and were a sinful people.
76.So, when the truth came to them from Us, they said, `Surely this isa manifest sorcery.'
77.Moses said, `What, do you say this to the truth, when it has come to you?Is this a sorcery? But sorcerers do not prosper.'
78.They said, `Art thou come to us to turn us from that we found our fatherspractising, and that the domination in the land might belong to you two? Wedo not believe you.'
%218% 79.Pharaoh said, `Bring me every cunning sorcerer.'
80.Then, when the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, `Cast you down what youwill cast.'
81.Then, when they had cast, Moses said, `What you have brought is sorcery;God will assuredly bring it to naught.God sets not right the work of thosewho do corruption.
82.God verifies the truth by His words, though sinners be averse.'
83.So none believed in Moses, save a seed of his people, for fear of Pharaoh andtheir Council, that they would persecute them; and Pharaoh was high in theland , and he was one of the prodigals.
84.Moses said, `O my people, if you believe in God, in Him put your trust, ifyou have surrendered.'
85.They said, `In God we have put our trust.Our Lord, make us not atemptation to the people of the evildoers,
86.and deliver us by Thy mercy from the people of the unbelievers.'
87.And We revealed to Moses and his brother, `Take you, for your people, inEgypt certain houses; and make your houses a direction for men to pray to;and perform the prayer; and do thou give good tidings to the believers.'
88.Moses said, `Our Lord, Thou hast given to Pharaoh and his Council adornmentand possessions in this present life.Our Lord, let them go astrayfrom Thy way; Our Lord, obliterate their possessions, and harden their heartsso that they do not believe, till they see the painful chastisement.'
%219% 89.He said, `Your prayer is answered; sogo you straight, and follow not the way of those that know not.'
90.And We brought the Children of Israel over the sea; and Pharaoh and his hostsfollowed them insolently and impetuously till, when the drowning overtookhim, he said, `I believe that there is no god but He in whom the Children ofIsrael believe; I am of those that surrender.'
91.`Now? And before thou didst rebel, being of those that did corruption.
92.So today We shall deliver thee with thy body, that thou mayest be a sign tothose after thee.Surely many men are heedless of Our signs.'
93.And We settled the Children of Israel in a sure settlement, and We providedthem with good things; so they differednot until the knowledge came to them.Surely thy Lord will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection touchingtheir differences.
94.So, if thou art in doubt regarding what We have sent down to thee, ask thosewho recite the Book before thee.The truth has come to thee from thy Lord;so be not of the doubters,
95.nor be of those who cry lies to God's signs so as to be of thelosers.
96.Those against whom thy Lord's word is realized will not believe,
97.though every sign come to them, till they see the painful chastisement.
%220% 98.Why was there never a city that believed, and its belief profited it?--Exceptthe people of Jonah; when they believed, We removed from them thechastisement of degradation in this present life, and We gave unto themenjoyment for a time.
99.And if thy Lord willed, whoever is in the earth would have believed, all ofthem, all together.Wouldst thou then constrain the people, until they arebelievers ?
100.It is not for any soul to believe save by the leave of God; and He laysabomination upon those who have no understanding.
101. Say: `Behold what is in the heavens and in the earth!' But neither signsnor warnings avail a people who do not believe.
102.So do they watch and wait for aught but the like of the days of thosewho passed away before them? Say: `Then watch and wait: I shall be with youwatching and waiting.'
103.Then We shall deliver Our Messengers and the believers.Even so, as isOur bounden duty, We shall deliver the believers.
104.Say: `O men, if you are in doubt regarding my religion, I serve not those youserve apart from God, but I serve God, who will gather you to Him, and I amcommanded to be of the believers,
105.and: "Set thy face to the religion, a man of pure faith, and be thou notof the idolaters;
106. and do not call, apart from God, on that which neither profits nor hurtsthee, for if thou dost, then thou wilt surely be of the evildoers.
%221% 107.And if God visits thee with affliction, none can remove it but He; and if Hedesires any good for thee, none can repel His bounty; He causes it to fallupon whomsoever He will of His servants." He is the All-forgiving, theAll-compassionate.'
108.Say: `O men, the truth has come to you from your Lord .Whosoever is guidedis guided only to his own gain, and whosoever goes astray, it is only to hisown loss.I am not a guardian over you.'
109.And follow thou what is revealed to thee; and be thou patient until God shalljudge; and He is the best of judges.
<11,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam RaA Book whose verses are set clear, and then distinguished, from One All-wise,All-aware:
2.`Serve you none but God' I am to you a warner from Him and a bearer of goodtidings
3.and: `Ask forgiveness of your Lord, then repent to Him, and He will giveyou fair enjoyment unto a term stated, and He will give of His bounty toevery man of grace.But if you should turn your backs I fear for you thechastisement of a mighty day;
4.to God shall you return; He is powerful over everything.'
5.Behold, they fold their breasts, to hide them from Him; behold, when theywrap themselves in their garments He knows what they secrete and what theypublish; surely He knows all the thoughts within the breasts.
%222% 6. No creature is there crawling on the earth, but its provision rests on God;He knows its lodging-place and its repository.All is in a Manifest Book.
7.And it is He who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and HisThrone was upon the waters--that He might try you, which one of you isfairer in works.And if thou sayest, `You shall surely be raised up after death,' theunbelievers will say, `This is naught but a manifest sorcery.'
8.And if We postpone the chastisement from them till a reckoned moment theywill say `What is detaining it?' Surely, the day it shall come to them, itshall not be turned aside from them, and they shall be encompassed by thatthey mocked at
9.And if We let a man taste mercy from Us, and then We wrest it from him, he isdesperate, ungrateful.
10.But if We let him taste prosperity after hardship that has visited him, hewill say, `The evils have gone from me'; behold, he is joyous,boastful--
11.save such as are patient, and do deeds of righteousness; for them awaitsforgiveness and a mighty wage.
12.Perchance thou art leaving part of what is revealed to thee, and thy breastis straitened by it, because they say, `Why has a treasure not been sent downupon him, or an angel not come with him?' Thou art only a warner; and God isa Guardian over everything.
%223% 13.Or do they say, `He has forged it'? Say: `Then bring you ten suras the likeof it, forged; and call upon whom you are able, apart from God, if you speaktruly.'
14.Then, if they do not answer you, know that it has been sent down with God'sknowledge, and that there is not god but He.So have you surrendered?
15.Whoso desires the present life and its adornment, We will pay them in fullfor their works therein, and they shall not be defrauded there;
16.those are they for whom in the world to come there is only the Fire; theirdeeds there will have failed, and void will be their works.
17.And what of him who stands upon a clear sign from his Lord, and a witnessfrom Him recites it, and before him is the Book of Moses for an ensample anda mercy? Those believe in it; but whosoever disbelieves in it, being one ofthe partisans, his promised land is the Fire.So be thou not in doubt of it;it is the truth from thy Lord, but most men do not believe.
18.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie? Those shallbe presented before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, `Those are theywho lied against their Lord.' Surely the curse of God shall rest upon theevildoers
19.who bar from God's way, desiring to make it crooked; they disbelieve in theworld to come;
%224% 20.they are unable to frustrate Him on earth and they have no protectors, apartfrom God.For them the chastisement shall be doubled; they could not hear,neither did they see.
21.Those are they that have lost their souls, and that they forged has goneastray from them;
22.they without doubt will be the greatest losers in the world to come.
23.But those who believe, and do righteous deeds, and have humbled themselvesunto their Lord--they shall be the inhabitants of Paradise, therein dwellingforever.
24.The likeness of the two parties is as the man blind and deaf, and the man whosees and hears; are they equal in likeness? Will you not remember?
25.And We sent Noah to his people: `I am for you a warner, and a bearer of goodtidings:
26.Serve you none but God.I fear for you the chastisement of a painful day.'
27.Said the Council of the unbelievers of his people, `We see thee not otherthan a mortal like ourselves, and we see not any following thee but thevilest of us, inconsiderately.We do not see you have over us anysuperiority; no, rather we think you are liars.'
28.He said, `O my people, what think you? If I stand upon a clear sign from myLord, and He has given me mercy from Him, and it has been obscured for you,shall we compel you to it while you are averse to it?
%225% 29.O my people, I do not ask of you wealth for this; my wage falls only uponGod.I will not drive away those who believe; they shall surely meet theirLord.But I see you are an ignorant people.
30.O my people, who would help me against God, if I drive you away?Will you not remember?
31.I do not say to you, "I possess the treasuries of God" I know not theUnseen; and I do not say, "I am an angel." Nor do I say to those your eyesdespise, "God will not give them any good"; God knows best what is in theirhearts.Surely in that case I should be among the evildoers.'
32.They said, `Noah, thou hast disputed with us and make much disputation withus.Then bring us that thou promisest us, if thou speakest truly.'
33.He said, `God will bring you it if He will; you cannot frustrate Him.
34.And my sincere counsel will not profit you, if I desire to counsel yousincerely, if God desires to pervert you; He is your Lord, and unto Him youshall be returned.'
35.Or do they say, `He has forged it'? Say: `If I have forged it, upon me fallsmy sin; and I am quit of the sins you do.'
36.And it was revealed to Noah, saying, `None of thy people shall believe but hewho has already believed; so be thou not distressed by that they maybe doing.
37.Make thou the Ark under Our eyes, and as We reveal; and address Me notconcerning those who have done evil; they shall be drowned.'
%226% 38.So he was making the Ark; and whenever a council of his people passed by himthey scoffed at him.He said, `If you scoff at us, we shall surely scoff atyou, as you scoff,
39.and you shall know to whom will come a chastisement degrading him, and uponwhom there shall alight a lasting chastisement.'
40.Until, when Our command came, and the Oven boiled, We said, `Embark in it twoof every kind, and thy family--except for him against whom the word hasalready been spoken--and whosoever believes.' And there believed not withhim except a few.
41.He said, `Embark in it! In God's Name shall be its course and its berthing.Surely my Lord is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.'
42.So it ran with them amid waves like mountains; and Noah called to his son,who was standing apart, `Embark with us, my son, and be thou not withthe unbelievers!'
43.He said, `I will take refuge in a mountain, that shall defend me from thewater.' Said he, `Today there is no defender from God's command but for himon whom He has mercy.' And the waves came between them, and he was among thedrowned.
44.And it was said, `Earth, swallow thy waters; and, heaven, abate!' And thewaters subsided, the affair was accomplished, and the Ark settled onEl- Judi, and it was said: `Away with the people of the evildoers!'
45.And Noah called unto his Lord, and said, `O my Lord, my son is of my family,and Thy promise is surely the truth.Thou art the justest of those thatjudge.'
%227% 46.Said He, `Noah, he is not of thy family; it is a deed not righteous.Do notask of Me that whereof thou hast no knowledge.I admonish thee, lest thoushouldst be among the ignorant.'
47.He said, `My Lord, I take refuge with Thee, lest I should ask of Thee thatwhereof I have no knowledge; for if Thou forgivest me not, and hast not mercyon me, I shall be among the losers.'
48.It was said, `Noah, get thee down in peace from Us, and blessings upon theeand on the nations of those with thee; and nations--We shall give themenjoyment, then there shall visit them from Us a painful chastisement.'
49.That is of the tidings of the Unseen, that We reveal to thee; thou didst notknow it, neither thy people, before this.So be patient; the issue ultimateis to the godfearing.
50.And to Ad their brother Hood; he said, `O my people, serve God! You have nogod other than He; you are but forgers.
51. O my people, I do not ask of you a wage for this; my wage falls only upon Himwho did originate me; will you not understand?
52.And, O my people, ask forgiveness of your Lord, then repent to Him, and Hewill loose heaven in torrents upon you, and He will increase you in strengthunto your strength; and turn not your backs as sinners.'
53.They said, `Hood, thou hast not brought us a clear sign, and we will notleave our gods for what thou sayest; we do not believe thee.
%228% 54.We say nothing, but that one of our gods has smitten thee with some evil.'He said, `I call God to witness; and witness you, that I am quit ofthat you associate
55.apart from Him; so try your guile on me, all together, then you shallgive me no respite.
56.Truly, I have put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord; there is nocreature that crawls, but He takes by the forelock.Surely my Lord is on astraight path.
57.But if you turn your backs, I have delivered to you that I was sent with untoyou, and my Lord will make a people other than you successors; you will nothurt Him anything.My Lord is Guardian over everything.'
58.And when Our command came, We delivered Hood and those who believed with himby a mercy from Us, and delivered them from a harsh chastisement.
59.That was Ad; they denied the signs of their Lord, and rebelled against HisMessengers, and followed the command of every froward tyrant.
60.And there was sent following after them in this world a curse, and upon theDay of Resurrection: `Surely Ad disbelieved in their Lord: so away with Ad,the people of Hood!'
61.And to Thamood their brother Salih; he said, `O my people, serve God!  Youhave no god other than He.It is He who produced you from the earth and hasgiven you to live therein; so ask forgiveness of Him, then repent to Him;surely my Lord is nigh, and answers prayer.'
62.They said, `Salih, thou hast hitherto been a source of hope among us. What,dost thou forbid us to serve that our fathers served? Truly we are in doubt,concerning what thou callest us to, disquieting.'
%229% 63.He said, `O my people, what think you? If I stand upon a clear sign from myLord, and He has given me mercy from Him, who shall help me against God if Irebel against Him? You would do nothing for me, except increase my loss.
64.O my people, this is the She-camel of God, to be a sign for you.Leave herthat she may eat in God's earth, and touch her not with evil, lest you beseized by a nighchastisement.'
65.But they hamstrung her; and he said, `Take your joy in your habitation threedays--that is a promise not to be belied.'
66.And when Our command came, We delivered Salih and those who believed with himby a mercy from Us, and from the degradation of that day; thy Lord is theAll-strong, the All-mighty.
67.And the evildoers were seized by the Cry Blast., and morning found them intheir habitations fallen prostrate
68.as if they never dwelt there: `Surely Thamood disbelieved in their Lord, soaway with Thamood!'
69.Our messengers came to Abraham with the good tidings; they said, `Peace!'`Peace,' he said; and presently he brought a roasted calf.
70.And when he saw their hands not reaching towards it, he was suspicious ofthem and conceived a fear of them.They said, `Fear not; we have been sentto the people of Lot.'
71.And his wife was standing by; she laughed, therefore We gave her theglad tidings of Isaac, and, after Isaac, of Jacob.
%230% 72.She said, `Woe is me! Shall I bear, being an old woman, and this my husbandis an old man? This assuredly is a strange thing.'
73.They said, `What, dost thou marvel at God's command? The mercy of Godand His blessings be upon you, O people of the House! Surely He isAll-laudable, All-glorious.'
74.So, when the awe departed from Abraham and the good tidings came to him,he was disputing with Us concerning the people of Lot;
75.Abraham was clement compassionate, penitent.
76.`O Abraham, turn away from this ; thy Lord's command has surely come, andthere is coming upon them a chastisement not to be turned back.'
77.And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled on their account anddistressed for them, and he said, `This is a fierce day.'
78.And his people came to him, running towards him; and erstwhile they had beendoing evil deeds.He said, `O my people, these are my daughters; they arecleaner for you.So fear God, and do not degrade me in front of.my guests.What, is there not one man among you of a right mind?'
79.They said, `Thou knowest we have no right tothy daughters, and thou wellknowest what we desire.'
80.He said, `O would that I had power against you, or might take refugein a strong pillar!'
81.They said, `Lot, we are messengers of thy Lord.They shall not reach thee;so set forth, thou with thy family, in a watch of the night, and let notany one of you turn round, excepting thy wife; surely she shall be smittenby that which smites them.Their promised time is the morning; is themorning not nigh?'
%231% 82.So when Our command came, We turned it uppermost nethermost, and rained on itstones of baked clay, one on another,
83.marked with thy Lord, and never far from the evildoers.
84.And to Midian their brother Shuaib; he said, `O my people, serve God!  Youhave no god other than He.And diminish not the measure and the balance.I see you are prospering; and I fear for you the chastisement of anencompassing day.
85.O my people, fill up the measure and the balance justly, and do not diminishthe goods of the people, and do not mischief in the land,working corruption.
86.God's remainder is better for you, if you are believers.And I am not aguardian over you.'
87.They said, `Shuaib, does thy prayer command thee that we should leave thatour fathers served, or to do as we will with our goods? Thou art theclement one, the right-minded.'
88.He said, `O my people, what think you? If I stand upon a clear sign from myLord, and He has provided me with fair provision from Him--and I desire notto come behind you, betaking me to that I forbid you; I desire only to setthings right, so far as I am able.My succour is only with God; in Him Ihave put my trust, and to Him I turn, penitent.
%232% 89.O my people, let not the breach with me move you, so that there smite you thelike of what smote the people of Noah, or the people of Hood, or the peopleof Salih; and the people of Lot are not far away from you.
90.And ask forgiveness of your Lord, then repent to Him; surely my Lord isAll-compassionate, All-loving.'
91.They said, Shuaib, we do not understand much of what thou sayest.Truly wesee thee weak among us; but for thy tribe we would have stoned thee; for thouart not strong against us.'
92.He said, `O my people, is my tribe stronger against you than God? And Him--have you taken Him as something to be thrust behind you? My Lord encompassesthe things you do.
93.O my people, act according to your station; I am acting; and certainly youwill know to whom will come the chastisement degrading him, and who is aliar.And be upon the watch; I shall be with you, watching.'
94.And when Our command came, We delivered Shuaib and those who believed withhim by a mercy from Us, and the evildoers were seized by the Cry Blast., andmorning found them in their habitations fallen prostate
95.as if they had never dwelt there: `So away with Midian, even as Thamoodwas done away!'
96.And We sent Moses with Our signs, and a manifest authority,
97.to Pharaoh and his Council; but they followed Pharaoh's command, andPharaoh's command was not right-minded.
%233% 98.He shall go before his people on the Day of Resurrection, and will have ledthem down to the Fire--evil the watering-place to be led down to!
99.And there was sent following after them in this world a curse, and upon theDay of Resurrection--evil the offering to be offered!
100.That is of the tidings of the cities We relate to thee; some of them arestanding and some stubble.
101.And We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves; their gods availed themnot that they called upon, apart from God, anything, when the command of thyLord came; and they increased them not, save in destruction.
102.Such is the seizing of thy Lord, when He seizes the cities that areevildoing; surely His seizing is painful, terrible.
103.Surely in that as a sign for him who fears the chastisement in the world tocome; that is a day mankind are to be gathered to, a day to witness,
104.and We shall not postpone it, save to a term reckoned;
105.the day it comes, no soul shall speak save by His leave; some of them shallbe wretched and some happy.
106.As for the wretched, they shall be in the Fire, wherein there shall be forthem moaning and sighing,
107.therein dwelling forever, so long as the heavens and earth abide, save as thyLord will; surely thy Lord accomplishes what He desires.
108.And as for the happy, they shall be in Paradise, therein dwelling forever, solong as the heavens and earth abide, save as thy Lord will--for agift unbroken.
%234% 109.So be thou not in doubt concerning what these men serve; they serve only astheir fathers served before; and We shall surely pay them in full theirportion undiminished.
110.And We gave Moses the Book; and there was difference regarding it, and butfor a word that preceded from thy Lord, it had been decided between them;and they are in doubt of it disquieting.
111.Surely each one of them--thy Lord will pay them in full for their works; Heis aware of the things they do.
112.So go thou straight, as thou hast been commanded, and whoso repents withthee; and be you not insolent; surely He sees the things you do.
113.And lean not on the evildoers, so that the Fire touches you--you have noprotectors apart from God--and then you will not be helped.
114.And perform the prayer at the two ends of the day and nigh of the night;surely the good deeds will drive away the evil deeds.That is a remembranceunto the mindful.
115.And be thou patient; God will not leave to waste the wage of thegood-doers.
116.Or if there had been, of the generations before you, men of a remainderforbidding corruption in the earth--except a few of those whom We deliveredof them; but the evildoers followed the ease they were given to exult in andbecame sinners.
117.Yet thy Lord would never destroy the cities unjustly, while as yet theirpeople were putting things right.
%235% 118.Had thy Lord willed, He would have made mankind one nation; but they continuein their differences
119.excepting those on whom thy Lord has mercy.To that end He created them, andperfectly is fulfilled the word of thy Lord: `I shall assuredly fillGehenna Hell.with jinn and men all together.'
120.And all that We relate to thee of the tidings of the Messengers is thatwhereby We strengthen thy heart; in these there has come to thee the truthand an admonition, and a reminder to the believers.
121.And say to the unbelievers: `Act you according to your station; we areacting.
122.And watch and wait, we are also watching and waiting.'
123.To God belongs the Unseen in the heavens and the earth.To Him the wholematter shall be returned; so serve Him, and put thy trust in Him.Thy Lordis not heedless of the things you do.
<12,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam RaThose are the signs of the Manifest Book.
2.We have sent it down as an Arabic Koran; haply you will understand.
3.We will relate to thee the fairest of stories in that We have revealed tothee this Koran, though before it thou wast one of the heedless.
4.When Joseph said to his father, `Father, I saw eleven stars, and the sun andthe moon; I saw them bowing down before me.'
%236% 5.He said, `O my son, relate not thy vision to thy brothers, lest they deviseagainst thee some guile.Surely Satan is to man a manifest enemy.
6.So will thy Lord choose thee, and teach thee the interpretation of tales, andperfect His blessing upon thee and upon the House of Jacob, as He perfectedit formerly on thy fathers Abraham and Isaac; surely thy Lord is All-knowing,All-wise.'
7.In Joseph and his brethren were signs for those who ask questions.
8.When they said, `Surely Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father thanwe, though we are a band.Surely our father is in manifest error.
9.Kill you Joseph, or cast him forth into some land, that your father's facemay be free for you, and thereafter you may be a righteous people.'
10.One of them said, `No, kill not Joseph, but cast him into the bottom of thepit and some traveller will pick him out, if you do aught.'
11.They said, `Father, what ails thee, that thou trustest us not with Joseph?Surely we are his sincere well-wishers.
12.Send him forth with us tomorrow, to frolic and play ; surely we shallbewatching over him.'
13.He said, `It grieves me that you should go with him, and I fear the wolf mayeat him, while you are heedless of him.'
14.They said, `If the wolf eats him, and we a band, then are we losers!'
%237% 15.So when they went with him, and agreed to put him in the bottom of the well,and We revealed to him, `Thou shalt tell them of this their doing when theyare unaware.'
16.And they came to their father in the evening, and they were weeping.
17.They said, `Father, we went running races, and left Joseph behind with ourthings; so the wolf ate him.But thou wouldst never believe us, though wespoke truly.'
18.And they brought his shirt with false blood on it.He said, `No; but yourspirits tempted you to do somewhat.But come, sweet patience! And God'ssuccour is ever there to seek against that you describe.'
19.Then came travellers, and they sent one of them, a water-drawer, who letdown his bucket.`Good news!' he said.`Here is a young man.' So they hidhim as merchandise; but God knew what theywere doing.
20.Then they sold him for a paltry price, a handful of counted dirhams; for theyset small store by him.
21.He that bought him, being of Egypt, said to his wife, `Give him goodlylodging, and it may be that he will profit us, or we may take him for our ownson.' So We established Joseph in the land, and that We might teach him theinterpretation of tales.God prevails in His purpose, but most menknow not.
22.And when he was fully grown, We gave him judgment and knowledge.Even so Werecompense the good-doers.
%238% 23.Now the woman in whose house he was solicited him, and closed the doors onthem.`Come,' she said,' take me! `God be my refuge,' he said.`Surely mylord has given me a goodly lodging.Surely the evildoers do not prosper.'
24.For she desired him; and he would have taken her, but that he saw the proofof his Lord.So was it, that We might turn away from him evil andabomination; he was one of Our devoted servants.
25.They raced to the door; and she tore his shirt from behind.They encounteredher master by the door.She said, `What is the recompense of him whopurposes evil against thy folk, but that he should be imprisoned, or apainful chastisement?'
26.Said he, `It was she that solicited me'; and a witness of her folk borewitness, `If his shirt has been torn from before then she has spoken truly,and he is one of the liars;
27.but if it be that his shirt has been torn from behind, then she has lied, andhe is one of the truthful.'
28.When he saw his shirt was torn from behind he said, `This is of your women'sguile; surely your guile is great.
29.Joseph, turn away from this; and thou, woman, ask forgiveness of thy crime;surely thou art one of the sinners.'
30.Certain women that were in the city said, `The Governor's wife has beensoliciting her page; he smote her heart with love; we see her in manifesterror.'
%239% 31.When she heard their sly whispers, she sent to them, and made ready for thema repast, then she gave to each one of them a knife.`Come forth, attend tothem,' she said.And when they saw him, they so admired him that they cuttheir hands, saying, `God save us! This is no mortal; he is no other but anoble angel.'
32.`So now you see,' she said.`This is he you blamed me for.Yes, I solicitedhim, but he abstained.Yet if he will not do what I command him, he shall beimprisoned, and be one of the humbled.'
33.He said, `My Lord, prison is dearer to me than that they call me to; yet ifThou turnest not from me their guile, then I shall yearn towards them, and sobecome one of the ignorant.'
34.So his Lord answered him, and He turned away from him their guile; surely Heis the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
35.Then it seemed good to them, after they had seen the signs, that they shouldimprison him for a while.
36.And there entered the prison with him two youths.Said one of them, `Idreamed that I was pressing grapes.' Said the other, `I dreamed that I wascarrying on my head bread, that birds were eating of.Tell us itsinterpretation; we see that thou art of the good-doers.'
37.He said, `No foodshall come to you for your sustenance, but ere it comes toyou I shall tell you its interpretation.That I shall tell you is of whatGod has taught me.I have forsaken the creed of a people who believe not inGod and who moreover are unbelievers in the world to come.
%240% 38.And I have followed the creed of my fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.Notours is it to associate aught with God.That is of God's bounty to us, andto men; but most men are not thankful.
39.Say, which is better, my fellow-prisoners--many gods at variance, or God theOne, the Omnipotent?
40.That which you serve, apart from Him, is nothing but names yourselves havenamed, you and your fathers; God has sent down no authority touching them.Judgment belongs only to God; He has commanded that you shall not serve anybut Him.That is the right religion; but most men know not.
41.Fellow-prisoners, as for one of you, he shall pour wine for his lord; as forthe other, he shall be crucified, and birds will eat of his head.The matteris decided whereonyou enquire.'
42.Then he said to the one he deemed should be saved of the two, `Mention mein thy lord's presence.' But Satan caused him to forget to mention him tohis master, so that he continued in the prison for certain years.
43.And the king said, `I saw in a dream seven fat kine, and seven lean onesdevouring them; likewise seven green ears of corn, and seven withered. Mycounsellors, pronounce to me upon my dream, if you are expoundersof dreams.'
%241% 44.`A hotchpotch of nightmares!' they said.`We know nothing of theinterpretation of nightmares.'
45.Then said the one who had been delivered, remembering after a time, `I willmyself tell you its interpretation; so send me forth.'
46.`Joseph, thou true man, pronounce to us regarding seven fat kine, that sevenlean ones were devouring, seven green ears of corn, and seven withered; haplyI shall return to the men, haply they will know.'
47.He said, `You shall sow seven years after your wont; what you have harvestedleave in the ear, excepting a little whereof you eat.
48.Then thereafter there shall come upon you seven hard years, that shall devourwhat you have laid up for them, all but a little you keep in store.
49.Then thereafter there shall come a year wherein the people will be succouredand press in season.'
50.The king said, `Bring him to me!' And when the messenger came to him, hesaid, `Return unto thy lord, and ask of him, "What of the women who cuttheir hands? "Surely my Lord has knowledge of their guile.'
51.`What was your business, women,' he said, `when you solicited Joseph?' `Godsave us!' they said.`We know no evil against him.' The Governor's wifesaid,' Now the truth is at last discovered; I solicited him; he is atruthful man.'
52.`That, so that he may know I betrayed him not secretly, and that God guidesnot the guile of the treacherous.
%242% 53.Yet I claim not that my soul was innocent--surely the soul of man incites toevil--except inasmuch as my Lord had mercy; truly my Lord is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.'
54.The king said, `Bring him tome! I would attach him to my person.' Then,when he had spoken with him, he said, `Today thou art established firmly inour favour and in our trust.'
55.He said, `Set me over the land's storehouses; I am a knowingguardian.'
56.So We established Joseph in the land, to make his dwelling there wherever hewould.We visit with Our mercy whomsoever We will, and We leave not to wastethe wage of the good-doers.
57.Yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe, and aregodfearing.
58.And the brethren of Joseph came, and entered unto him, and he knew them, butthey knew him not.
59.When he had equipped them with their equipment he said, `Bring me a certainbrother of yours from your father.Do you not see that I fill up themeasure, and am the best of hosts?
60.But if you bring him not to me, there shall be no measure for you with me,neither shall you come nigh me.'
61.They said, `We will solicit him of our father; that we will do.'
62.He said to his pages, `Put their merchandise in their saddlebags; haply theywill recognize it when they have turned to their people; haply they willreturn.'
63.So, when they had returned to their father, they said, `Father, the measurewas denied to us; so send with us our brother, that we may obtain themeasure; surely we shall be watching over him.'
%243% 64.He said, `And shall I entrust him to you otherwise than as I entrusted beforehis brother to you? Why, God is the best guardian, and He is the mostmerciful of the merciful.'
65.And when they opened their things, they found their merchandise, restored tothem.`Father,' they said, `what more should we desire? See, ourmerchandise here is restored to us.We shall get provision for our family,and we shall be watching over our brother; we shall obtain an extra camel'sload--that is an easy measure.'
66.He said, `Never will I send him with you until you bring me a solemn pledgeby God that you will surely bring him back to me unless it be that you areencompassed.' When they had brought him their solemn pledge he said, `Godshall be Guardian over what we say.'
67.He also said, `O my sons, enter not by one door; enter by separate doors.Yet I cannot avail you anything against God; judgment belongs not to anybut God.In Him I have put my trust; and in Him let all put their trustwho put their trust.'
68.And when they entered after the manner their father commanded them, itavailed them nothing against God; but it was a need in Jacob's soul that heso satisfied.Verily he was possessed of a knowledge for that We had taughthim; but most men know not.
69.And when they entered unto Joseph, he said, taking his brother into his arms,`I am thy brother; so do not despair of that they have done.'
%244% 70.Then, when he had equipped them with their equipment, he put his drinking-cupinto the saddlebag of his brother.Then a herald proclaimed, `Ho, cameleers,you are robbers!'
71.They said, turning to them, `What is it that you are missing?'
72.They said, `We are missing the king's goblet.Whoever brings it shallreceive a camel's load; that I guarantee.'
73.`By God,' they said, `you know well that we came not to work corruption inthe land.We are not robbers.'
74.They said, `And what shall be its recompense if you are liars?
75.They said, `This shall be its recompense--in whoever's saddlebag the gobletis found, he shall be its recompense.So we recompensethe evildoers.'
76.So he made beginning with their sacks, before his brother's sack, then hepulled it out of his brother's sack.So We contrived for Joseph's sake; hecould not have taken his brother, according to the king's doom, except thatGod willed.Whomsoever We will, We raise in rank; over every man ofknowledge is One who knows.
77.They said, `If he is a thief, a brother of his was a thief before.' ButJoseph secreted it in his soul and disclosed it not to them, saying, `You arein a worse case; God knows very well what you are describing.'
78.They said, `Mighty prince, he has a father, aged and great with years; sotake one of us in his place; we see that thou art one of the good-doers.'
%245% 79.He said, `God forbid that we should take any other but him in whosepossession we found the goods; for if we did so, we would be evildoers.'
80.When they despaired of moving him, they conferred privily apart.Said theeldest of them, `Do you not know how your father has taken a solemn pledgefrom you by God, and aforetime you failed regarding Joseph? Never will Iquit this land, until my father gives me leave, or God judges in my favour;He is the best of judges.
81.Return you all to your father, and say, "Father, thy son stole; we do nottestify except that we know; we were no guardians of the Unseen.
82.Enquire of the city wherein we were, and the caravan in which we approached;surely we are truthful men".'
83.`No!' he said.`But your spirits tempted you to do somewhat.But come,sweet patience! Haply God will bring them all to me; He is the All-knowing,the All-wise.'
84.And he turned away from them, and said, `Ah, woe is me for Joseph!' And hiseyes turned white because of the sorrow that he choked within him.
85.`By God,' they said, `thou wilt never cease mentioning Joseph till thou artconsumed, or among the perishing.'
86.He said, `I make complaint of my anguish and my sorrow unto God; I knowfrom God that you know not.
%246% 87.Depart, my sons, and search out tidings of Joseph and his brother.Do notdespair of God's comfort; of God's comfort no man despairs, excepting thepeople of the unbelievers.'
88.So, when they entered unto him, they said, `O mighty prince, afflictionhas visited us and our people.We come with merchandise of scant worth.Fill up to us the measure, and be charitable to us; surely God recompensesthe charitable.'
89.He said, `Are you aware of what you did with Joseph and his brother, whenyou were ignorant?
90.They said, `Why art thou indeed Joseph?' `I am Joseph,' he said.`This is my brother.God has indeed been gracious unto us.Whosoever fearsGod, and is patient--surely God leaves not to waste the wage ofthe good-doers.'
91.`By God,' they said, `God has indeed preferred thee above us, andcertainly we have been sinful.'
92.He said, `No reproach this day shall be on you; God will forgive you; Heis the most merciful of the merciful.
93.Go, take this shirt, and do you cast it on my father's face, and he shallrecover his sight; then bring me your family all together.'
94.So, when the caravan set forth, their father said, `Surely I perceiveJoseph's scent, unless you think me doting.'
95.They said, `By God, thou art certainly in thy ancient error.'
%247% 96.But when the bearer of good tidings came to him, and laid it on his face,forthwith he saw once again.He said, `Did I not tell you I know from Godthat you know not?'
97.They said, `Our father, ask forgiveness of our crimes for us; for certainlywe have been sinful.'
98.He said, `Assuredly I will ask my Lord to forgive you; He is theAll-forgiving, the All-compassionate.'
99.So, when they entered unto Joseph, he took his father and mother into hisarms saying, `Enter you into Egypt, if God will, in security.'
100.And he lifted his father and mother upon the throne; and the others fell downprostrate before him.`See, father,' he said, `this is the interpretationof my vision of long ago; my Lord has made it true.He was good to me whenHe brought me forth from the prison, and again when He brought you out of thedesert, after that Satan set at variance me and my brethren.My Lord isgentle to what He will; He is the All-knowing, the All-wise.
101.O my Lord, Thou hast given me to rule, and Thou hast taught me theinterpretation of tales.O Thou, the Originator of the heavens and earth,Thou art my Protector in this world and the next.O receive me to Thee intrue submission, and join me with the righteous.'
102.That is of the tidings of the Unseen that We reveal to thee; thou wast notwith them when they agreed upon their plan, devising.
103.Yet, be thou ever so eager, the most part of men believe not.
%248% 104.Thou askest of them no wage for it; it is nothing but a reminder unto allbeings.
105.How many a sign there is in the heavens and in the earth that they pass by,turning a way from it!
106.And the most part of them believe not in God, but they associate other godswith Him.
107.Do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of thechastisement of God, or that the Hour shall not come upon them suddenlywhen they are unaware?
108.Say: `This is my way.I call to God with sure knowledge, I and whoeverfollows after me.To God be glory! And I am not among the idolaters.'
109.We sent not forth any before thee, but men We revealed to of the peopleliving in the cities.Have they not journeyed in the land? Have they notbeheld how was the end of those before them? Surely the abode of the worldto comes is better for those that are godfearing.What, do you notunderstand?
110.Till, when the Messengers despaired, deeming they were counted liars, Ourhelp came to them and whosoever We willed was delivered.Our might willnever be turned back from the people of the sinners.
111.In their stories is surely a lesson to men possessed of minds; it is not atale forged, but a confirmation of what is before it, and a distinguishingof every thing, and a guidance, and a mercy to a people who believe.
%249% <13,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim RaThose are the signs of the Book; and that which has been sent down to theefrom thy Lord is the truth, but most men do not believe.
2.God is He who raised up the heavens without pillars you can see,then He sat Himself upon the Throne.He subjected the sun and the moon,each one running to a term stated.He directs the affair; He distinguishesthe signs; haply you will have faith in the encounter with your Lord.
3.It is He who stretched out the earth and set therein firm mountains andrivers, and of every fruit He placed there two kinds, covering the day withthe night.Surely in that are sign for a people who reflect.
4.And on the earth are tracts neighbouring each to each, and gardens of vines,and fields sown, and palms in pairs, and palms single, watered with onewater; and some of them We preferin produce above others.Surely in thatare signs for a people who understand.
5.If thou wouldst wonder, surely wonderful is their saying, `What, when we aredust shall we indeed then be raised up again in new creation?' Those arethey that disbelieve in their Lord; those--on their necks are fetters; thoseshall be the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
%250% 6.They would have thee hasten the evil ere the good; yet there have passed awaybefore them examples.Thy Lord is forgiving to men, for all theirevil-doing, and thy Lord is terrible in retribution.
7.The unbelievers say, `Why has a sign not been sent down upon him from hisLord? `Thou art only a warner, and a guide to every people.
8.God knows what every female bears, and the wombs' shrinking and swelling;everything with Him has its measure--
9.the Knower of the unseen and the visible, the All-great, the All-exalted.
10.Alike of you is he who conceals his saying, and he who proclaims it, he whohides himself in the night, and he who sallies by day;
11.he has attendant angels, before him and behind him, watching over him byGod's command.God changes not what is in a people, until they change whatis in themselves.Whensover God desires evil for a people, there is noturning it back; apart from Him, they have no protector.
12.It is He who shows you the lightning, for fear and hope, and produces theheavy clouds;
13.the thunder proclaims His praise, and the angels, in awe of Him.He loosesthe thunderbolts, and smites with them whomsoever He will; yet they disputeabout God, who is mighty in power.
%251% 14.To Him is the call of truth; and those upon whom they call, apart from Him,answer them nothing, but it is as a man who stretches out his hands to waterthat it may reach his mouth, and it reaches it not.The prayer of theunbelievers goes only astray.
15.SUJDAH AYA.@To God bow all who are in the heavens and the earth, willinglyor unwillingly, as do their shadows also in the mornings and theevenings.
16.Say: `Who is the Lord of the heavens and of theearth?' Say: `God.'Say: `Then have you taken unto you others beside Him to be your protectors,even such as have no power to profit or hurt themselves?' Say: `Are theblind and the seeing man equal, or are the shadows and the light equal? Orhave they ascribed to God associates who created as He created, so thatcreation is all alike to them?' Say: `God is the Creator of everything, andHe is the One, the Omnipotent.'
17.He sends down out of heaven water, and the wadis flow each in its measure,and the torrent carries a swelling scum; and out of that over which theykindle fire, being desirous of ornament or ware, out of that rises a scum thelike of it.So God strikes both the true and the false.As for the scum, itvanishes as jetsam, and what profits men abides in the earth.Even so Godstrikes His similitudes.
18.For those who answer their Lord, the reward most fair; and those who answerHim not--if they possessed all that is in the earth, and the like of it withit, they would offer it for their ransom.Those--theirs shall be the evilreckoning, and their refuge shall be Gehenna Hell.--an evil cradling!
%252% 19.What, is he who knows what is sent down to thee from thy Lord is the truth,like him who is blind? Only men possessed of minds remember;
20.who fulfil God's covenant, and break not the compact,
21.who join what God has commanded shall be joined, and fear their Lord, anddread the evil reckoning, patient men, desirous of the Face of their Lord,
22.who perform the prayer, and expend of that We have provided them, secretlyand in public, and who avert evil with good-theirs shall be the UltimateAbode,
23.Gardens of Eden which they shall enter; and those who were righteous of theirfathers, and their wives, and their seed, shall enter them, and the angelsshall enter unto them from every gate:
24.`Peace be upon you, for that you were patient.' Fair is the Ultimate Abode.
25.And those who break the covenant of God after His compact,and who snap whatGod has commanded to be joined, and who work corruption in the earth--theirsshall be the curse, and theirs the Evil abode.
26.God outspreads and straitens His provision unto whomsoever He will.Theyrejoice in this present life; and this present life, beside the world tocome, is naught but passing enjoyment.
27.The unbelievers say, `Why has a sign not been sent down upon him from hisLord?' Say: `God leads astray whomsoever He will, and He guides to Him allwho are penitent.'
28.Those who believe, their hearts being at rest in God's remembrance--in God'sremembrance are at rest the hearts
%253% 29.of those who believe and do righteous deeds; theirs is blessedness and a fairresort.
30.Thus We have sent thee among a nation before which other nations have passedaway, to recite to them that We have revealed to thee; and yet theydisbelieve in the All-merciful.Say: `He is my Lord--there is no god but He.In Him I have put my trust, and to Him I turn.'
31.If only a Koran whereby the mountains were set in motion, or the earth werecleft, or the dead were spoken to--nay, but God's is theaffair altogether.Did not the believers know that, if God had willed, He would have guided menall together? And still the unbelievers are smitten by a shattering for whatthey wrought, or it alights nigh their habitation, until God's promise comes;and God will not fail the tryst.
32.Messengers indeed were scoffed at before thee, and I respited theunbelievers; then I seized them--and how was my retribution?
33.What, He who stands over every soul for what it has earned?--And yet theyascribe to God associates.Say: `Name them! Or will you tell Him what Heknows not in the earth? Or in apparent words? `Nay; but decked out fair tothe unbelievers is their devising, and they are barred from the way; andwhomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he.
34.For them is chastisement in the present life; and the chastisement of theworld to come is yet more grievous; they have none to defend them from God.
%254% 35.The likeness of Paradise, that is promised to the godfearing: beneath itrivers flow, its produce is eternal, and its shade.That is the requital ofthe godfearing; and the requital of the unbelievers is--the Fire !
36.And those to whom We have given the Book rejoice in what is sent down untothee; and of the parties some reject some of it.Say: `I have only beencommanded to serve God, and not to associate aught with Him.To Him I call,and to Him I turn.'
37.Even so We have sent it down as an Arabic judgment.And if thou dost followtheir caprices, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou shalt have noprotector against God, and no defender.
38.And We sent Messenger before thee, and We assigned to them wives, and seed;and it was not for any Messengers to bring a sign, but by God's leave.Everyterm has a Book.
39.God blots out, and He establishes whatsoever He will; and with Him is theEssence of the Book.
40.Whether We show thee a part of that We promise them, or We call thee to Us,it is thine only to deliver the Message, and Ours the reckoning.
41.Have they not seen how We come to the land diminishing it in its extremities?God judges; none repels His judgment; He is swift at the reckoning.
42.Those that were before them devised; but God's is the devising altogether.He knows what every soul earns.The unbelievers shall assuredly know whosewill be the Ultimate Abode.
%255% 43.The unbelievers say, `Thou art not an Envoy.' Say: `God suffices as a witnessbetween me and you, and whosoever possesses knowledge of the Book.'
<14,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam RaA Book We have sent down to thee that thou mayest bring forth mankind fromthe shadows to the light by the leave of their Lord, to the path of theAll-mighty, the All-laudable,
2.God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth.And woe to the unbelievers for a terrible chastisement,
3.such as prefer the present life over the world to come, and bar from God'sway, desiring to make it crooked--they are in far error.
4.And We have sent no Messenger save with the tongue of his people, that hemight make all clear to them; then God leads astray whomsoever He will, andHe guides whomsoever He will; and He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.
5.And We sent Moses with Our signs--`Bring forth thy people from the shadows tothe light and remind thou them of the Days of God.' Surely in that are signsfor every man enduring, thankful!
%256% 6.And when Moses said to his people, `Remember God's blessing upon you when Hedelivered you from the folk of Pharaoh, who were visiting you with evilchastisement, slaughtering your sons, and sparing your women--and in that wasa grievous trial from your Lord.
7.And when your Lord proclaimed, "If you are thankful, surely I will increaseyou, but if you are thankless My chastisement is surely terrible." '
8.And Moses said, `If you are thankless, you and whoso is on earth, alltogether, yet assuredly God is All-sufficient, All-laudable.'
9.Has there not come to you the tidings of those who were before you--thepeople of Noah, Ad, Thamood, and of those after them whom none knows but God?Their Messengers came to them with the clear signs; but they thrust theirhands into their mouths, saying, `We certainly disbelieve in the Message youhave been sent with, and we are in doubt, concerning that you call us unto,disquieting.'
10.Their Messengers said, `Is there any doubt regarding God, the Originator ofthe heavens and the earth, who calls you so that He may forgive you yoursins, and defer you to a term stated? `They said, `You are nothing butmortals, like us; you desire to bar us from that our fathers served; thenbring us a manifest authority.'
%257% 11.Their Messengers said to them, `We are nothing but mortals, like you; but Godis gracious unto whomsoever He will of His servants.
12.It is not for us to bring you an authority save by the leave of God; and inGod let the believers put all their trust.And why should we not put ourtrust in God, seeing that He has guided us in our ways? We will surelyendure patiently, whatever you hurt us; and in God let all put their trustwho put their trust.'
13.The unbelievers said to their Messengers, `We will assuredly expel you fromour land, or you will surely return into our creed.' Then did their Lordreveal unto them: `We will surely destroy the evildoers,
14.and We will surely make you to dwell in the land after them--that, for himwho fears My station and fears My threat.'
15.They sought a judgment; then was disappointed every frowardtyrant--
16.beyond him Gehenna Hell., and he is given to drink of oozing pus,
17.the which he gulps, and can scarce swallow, and death comes upon him fromevery side, yet he cannot die; and still beyond him is a harsh chastisement.
18.The likeness of those who disbelieve in their Lord: their works are as ashes,whereon the wind blows strong upon a tempestuous day; they have no power overthat they have earned--that is the far error!
%258% 19.Hast thou not seen that God created the heavens and the earth in truth? IfHe will, He can put you away and bring a new creation;
20.that is surely no great matter for God.
21.They sally forth unto God, all together; then say the weak to those who waxedproud, `We were your followers; will you avail us against the chastisement ofGod anything?' They say, `If God had guided us, we would have guided you.Alike it is for us whether we cannot endure , or whether we are patient; wehave no asylum.'
22.And Satan says, when the issue is decided, `God surely promised you a truepromise; and I promised you, then I failed you, for I had no authority overyou, but that I called you, and you answered me.So do not blame me, butblame yourselves; I cannot aid you, neither can you aid me.I disbelieved inyour associating me with God aforetime.' As for the evildoers, for themawaits a painful chastisement;
23.but as for those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, they shall beadmitted to gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever,by the leave of their Lord, their greeting therein: `Peace!'
24.Hast thou not seen how God has struck a similitude? A good word is as a goodtree--its roots are firm, and its branches are in heaven;
%259% 25.it gives its produce every season by the leave of its Lord.So God strikessimilitudes for men; haply they will remember.
26.And the likeness of a corrupt word is as a corrupt tree--uprooted from theearth, having no stablishment.
27.God confirms those who believe with the firm word, in the present life and inthe world to come; and God leads astray the evildoers; and God does whatHe will.
28.Hast thou not seen those who exchanged the bounty of God with unthankfulness,and caused their people to dwell in the abode of ruin?--
29.Gehenna Hell., wherein they are roasted; an evil stablishment!
30.And they set up compeers to God, that they might lead astray from His way.Say: `Take your joy! Your homecoming shall be--the Fire!'
31.Say to My servants who believe, that they perform the prayer, and expend ofthat We have provided them, secretly and in public, before a day comeswherein shall be neither bargaining nor befriending.
32.It is God who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down out of heavenwater wherewith He brought forth fruits to be your sustenance.And Hesubjected to you the ships to run upon the sea at His commandment;
33.and He subjected to you the rivers and He subjected to you the sun and moonconstant upon their courses, and He subjected to you the night and day,
%260% 34.and gave you of all you asked Him.If you count God's blessing, you willnever number it; surely man is sinful, unthankful!
35.And when Abraham said, `My Lord, make this land secure, and turn me and mysons away from serving idols;
36.my Lord, they have led astray many men.Then whoso follows me belongs to me;and whoso rebels against me, surely Thou art All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
37.Our Lord, I have made some of my seed to dwell in a valley where is no sownland by Thy Holy House; Our Lord, let them perform the prayer, and makehearts of men yearn towards them, and provide them with fruits; haply theywill be thankful.
38.Our Lord, Thou knowest what we keep secret and what we publish; from Godnothing whatever is hidden in earth and heaven.
39.Praise be to God, who has given me, though I am old, Ishmael and Isaac;surely my Lord hears the petition.
40.My Lord, make me a performer of the prayer, and of my seed.Our Lord, andreceive my petition.
41.Our Lord, forgive Thou me and my parents, and the believers, upon the daywhen the reckoning shall come to pass.'
42.Deem not that God is heedless of what the evildoers work; He is onlydeferring them to a day when eyes shall stare,
%261% 43.when they shall run with necks outstretched and heads erect, their glancesnever returned on themselves, their hearts void.
44.And warn mankind of the day when the chastisement comes on them, And thosewho did evil shall say, `Our Lord, defer us to a near term, and we willanswer Thy call, and follow the Messengers.' `Ah, but did you not swearaforetime there should be no removing for you?
45.And you dwelt in the dwelling-places of those who wronged themselves, and itbecame clear to you how We did with them, and how We struck similitudes foryou.
46.They devised their devising, and their devising is known to God, thoughtheir devising were such as to remove mountains.'
47.So do not deem that God will fail in His promise to His Messengers; surelyGod is All-mighty, Vengeful.
48.Upon the day the earth shall be changed to other than the earth, and theheavens and they sally forth unto God, the One, the Omnipotent.
49.And thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters,
50.of pitch their shirts, their faces enveloped by the Fire,
51.that God may recompense every soul for its earnings; surely God is swift atthe reckoning.
52.This is a Message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned by it,and that they may know that He is One God, and that all possessed of mindsmay remember.
%262% <15,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam RaThose are the signs of the Book and of a manifest Koran.
2.Perchance the unbelievers will wish that they had surrendered:
3.leave them to eat, and to take their joy, and tobe bemused by hope;certainly they will soon know!
4.Never a city have We destroyed, but it had a known decree,
5.and no nation outstrips its term, nor do they put it back.
6.They say: `Thou, upon whom the Remembrance is sent down, thou art assuredlypossessed!
7.Why dost thou not bring the angels unto us, if thou speakest truly?'
8.We send not down the angels, save with truth; then they would not berespited.
9.It is We who have sent down the Remembrance, and We watch over it.
10.Indeed, We sent Messengers before thee, among the factions of theancients,
11.and not a single Messenger came to them, but they mocked at him;
12.even so We cause it to enter into the hearts of the sinners--
13.they believe not in it, though the wont of the ancients is already gone.
14.Though We opened to them a gate in heaven, and still they mountedthrough it,
15.yet would they say, `Our eyes have been dazzled; nay, we are a peoplebewitched!'
%263% 16.We have set in heaven constellations and decked them out fair to thebeholders,
17.and guarded them from every accursed Satan
18.excepting such as listens by stealth--and he is pursued by a manifest flame.
19.And the earth--We stretched it forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and Wecaused to grow therein of every thing justly weighed, and
20.there appointed for you livelihood, and for those you provide notfor.
21.Naught is there, but its treasuries are with Us, and We send it not downbut in a known measure.
22.And We loose the winds fertilising, and We send down out of heaven water,then We give it to you to drink, and you are not its treasurers.
23.It is We who give life, and make to die, and it is We who are theinheritors.
24.We know the ones of you who press forward, and We know the laggards;
25.and it is thy Lord shall muster them, and He is All-wise,All-knowing.
26.Surely We created man of a clay of mud moulded,
27.and the jinn created We before of fire flaming.
28.And when thy Lord said to the angels, `See, I am creating a mortal of a clayof mud moulded.
29.When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall you down, bowingbefore him!'
30.Then the angels bowed themselves all together,
31.save Iblis; he refused to be among those bowing.
%264% 32.Said He, `What ails thee, Iblis, that thou art not among those bowing?'
33.Said he, `I would never bow myself before a mortal whom Thou hast created ofa clay of mud moulded.'
34.Said He, `Then go thou forth hence; thou art accursed.
35.Upon thee shall rest the curse, till the Day of Doom.'
36.Said he, `My Lord, respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
37.Said He, `Thou art among the ones that are respited
38.unto the day of a known time.'
39.Said he, `My Lord, for Thy perverting me I shall deck all fair to them in theearth, and I shall pervert them, all together,
40.excepting those Thy servants among them that are devoted.'
41.Said He, `This is for Me a straight path:
42.over My servants thou shalt have no authority, except those that follow thee,being perverse;
43.Gehenna Hell shall be their promised land all together.
44.Seven gates it has, and unto each gate a set portion of them belongs.'
45.But the godfearing shall be amidst gardens and fountains:
46.`Enter you them, in peace and security!'
47.We shall strip away all rancour that is in their breasts; as brothers theyshall be upon couches set face to face;
48.no fatigue there shall smite them, neither shall they ever be driven forthfrom there.
49.Tell My servants I am the All-forgiving, the All-compassionate,
50.and that My chastisement is the painful chastisement.
51.And tell them of the guests of Abraham,
%265% 52.when they entered unto him, saying, `Peace!' He said, `behold, we are afraidof you.'
53.They said, `Be not afraid, behold, we give thee good tidings of a cunningboy.'
54.He said, `What, do you give me good tidings, though old age has smitten me?Of what do you give me good tidings?'
55.They said, `We give thee good tidings of truth.Be not of those thatdespair.'
56.He said, `And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, excepting those that areastray?'
57.He said, `And what is your business, envoys?'
58.They said, `We have been sent unto a people of sinners,
59.excepting the folk of Lot; them we shall deliver all together,
60.excepting his wife--we have decreed, she shall surely be of those thattarry.'
61.So, when the envoys came to the folk of Lot,
62.he said, `Surely you are a people unknown to me!'
63.They said, `Nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they weredoubting.
64.We have come to thee with the truth, and assuredly we speak truly.
65.So set forth, thou with thy family, in a watch of the night, and follow afterthe backs of them, and let not any one of you turn round; and depart unto theplace you are commanded.'
66.And We decreed for him that commandment, that the last remnant of thoseshould be cut off in the morning.
67.And the people of the city came rejoicing.
68.He said, `These are my guests; put me not to shame,
69.and fear God, and do not degrade me.'
70.They said, `Have we not forbidden thee all beings?
%266% 71.`He said, `These are my daughters, if you would be doing.
72.`By thy life, they wandered blindly in their dazzlement,
73.and the Cry Blast seized them at the sunrise,
74.and We turned it uppermost nethermost and rained on it stones of baked clay.
75.Surely in that are signs for such as mark;
76.surely it is on a way yet remaining;
77.surely in that is a sign for believers.
78.Certainly the dwellers in the Thicket were evildoers,
79.and We took vengeance on them.The two of them were upon a roadwaymanifest.
80.The dwellers in El-Hijr cried lies to the Envoys.
81.We brought them Our signs, and they turned away from them.
82.They were hewing the mountains into houses, therein dwelling securely;
83.and the Cry Blast seized them in the morning;
84.that they earned did not avail them.
85.We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, savein truth.Surely the Hour is coming; so pardon thou, with a graciouspardoning.
86.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-creator, the All-knowing.
87.We have given thee seven of the oft-repeated, and the mighty Koran.
88.Stretch not thine eyes to that We have given pairs of them to enjoy; and donot sorrow for them, and lower thy wing unto the believers,
89.and say, `Surely, I am the manifest warner.'
90.So We sent it down to the partitioners,
%267% 91.who have broken the Koran into fragments.
92.Now by thy Lord, We shall surely question them all together
93.concerning that they were doing.
94.So shout that thou art commanded and turn thou away from the idolaters.
95.We suffice thee against the mockers,
96.even against those who set up with God another god.Certainly they will soonknow!
97.We know indeed thy breast is straitened by the things they say.
98.Proclaim they Lord's praise, and be of those that bow,
99.and serve thy Lord, until the Certain comes to thee.
<16,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.God's command comes; so seek not to hasten it.Glory be to Him! High be Heexalted above that they associate with Him!
2.He sends down the angels with the Spirit of His command upon whomsoever Hewill among His servants, saying: Give you warning that there is no God but I;so fear you Me!
3.He created the heavens and the earth in truth; high be He exalted above thatthey associate with Him!
4.He created man of a sperm-drop; and, behold, he is a manifest adversary.
5.And the cattle--He created them for you; in them is warmth, and uses various,and of them you eat,
6.and there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home to rest andwhen you drive them forth abroad to pasture;
%268% 7.and they bear your loads unto a land that you never would reach, exceptingwith great distress. Surely your Lord is All-clement, All-compassionate.
8.And horses, and mules, and asses, for you to ride, and as an adornment; andHe creates what you know not.
9.God's it is to show the way; and some do swerve from it. If He willed, Hewould have guided you all together.
10.It is He who sends down to you out of heaven water of which you have todrink, and of which trees, for you to pasture your herds,
11.and thereby He brings forth for you crops, and olives, and palms, and vines,and all manner of fruit. Surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect
12.And He subjected to you the night and day, and the sun and moon; and thestars are subjected by His command.
13.Surely in that is a sign for a people who understand.
14.And that which He has multiplied for you in the earth of diverse hues.Surely in that is a sign for a people who remember. It is He who subjectedto you the sea, that you may eat of it fresh flesh, and bring forth out of itornaments for you to wear; and thou mayest see the ships cleaving through it;and that you may seek of His bounty, and so haply you will be thankful.
%269% 15.And He cast on the earth firm mountains, lest it shake with you, andriversand ways; so haply you will be guided;
16.and waymarks; and by the stars they are guided.
17.Is He who creates as he who dose not create?  Will you not remember?
18.If you count God's blessing, you will never number it; surely God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.
19.And God knows what you keep secret and what you publish.
20.And those they call upon, apart from God, created nothing, and themselves arecreated,
21.dead, not alive, and are not aware when they shall be raised.
22.Your God is One God. And they who believe not in the world to come, theirhearts deny, and they have waxed proud.
23.Without a doubt God knows what they keep secret and what they publish; Heloves not those that wax proud.
24.And when it is said to them, `What has your Lord sent down?' they say,`Fairy-tales of the ancients.'
25.That they may bear their loads complete on the Day of Resurrection, and someof the loads of those that they lead astray without any knowledge. O evilthe load they bear!
26.Those that were before them contrived; then God came upon their building fromthe foundations, and the roof fell down on them from over them, and thechastisement came upon them from whence they were not aware.
%270% 27.Then on the Day of Resurrection He will degrade them, saying, `Where are Myassociates concerning which you made a breach together?'  Those that weregiven the knowledge will say, `Degradation today and evil are on theunbelievers,
28.whom the angels take while still they are wronging themselves.'  Then theywill offer surrender: `We were doing nothing evil.'  `Nay; but surely God hasknowledge of the things you did.
29.So enter the gates of Gehenna, there to dwell forever.'  Evil is the lodgingof those that wax proud.
30.And it shall be said to the godfearing, `What has your Lord sent down ?'They will say, `Good! For those who do good in this world good; and surelythe abode of the world to come is better; excellent is the abode of thegodfearing
31.Gardens of Eden they shall enter, underneath which rivers flow, wherein theyshall have all they will. So God recompenses the godfearing,
32.whom the angels take while they are goodly, saying, `Peace be on you!  EnterParadise for that you were doing.'
33.Do they look for aught but that the angels shall come to them, or thy Lord'scommand shall come?  So did those before them, and God wronged them not, butthemselves they wronged.
34.So the evil things that they wrought smote them, and they were encompassed bythat they mocked at.
%271% 35.The idolators say, `If God had willed we would not have served, apart fromHim, anything, neither we nor our fathers, nor would we have forbidden, apartfrom Him, anything.'  So did those before them; yet is aught for theMessengers, but to deliver the manifest Message?
36.Indeed, We sent forth among every nation a Messenger, saying: `Serve you God,and eschew idols.'  Then some of them God guided, and some were justlydisposed to error. So journey in the land, and behold how was the end ofthem that cried lies.
37.Though thou art ever so eager to guide them, God guides not those whom Heleads astray; they have no helpers.
38.They have sworn by God the most earnestoaths God will never raise up him who dies; nay, it is a promise binding uponHim, but most men know not,
39.so that He may make clear to them that whereon they were at variance, andthat the unbelievers may know that they were truly liars.
40.The only words We say to a thing, when We desire it, is that We say to it`Be,' and it is.
41.And those that emigrated in God's cause after they were wronged--We shallsurely lodge them in this world in a goodly lodging, and the wage of theworld to come is greater, did they but know;
42.even such men as are patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
%272% 43.We sent not any before thee, except men to whom We revealed: `Question thepeople of the Remembrance, if it should be that you do not know'--
44.with the clear signs, and the Psalms; and We have sent down to thee theRemembrance that thou mayest make clear to mankind what was sent down tothem; and so haply they will reflect.
45.Do they feel secure, those who devise evil things, that God will not causethe earth to swallow them, or that the chastisement will not come upon them,from whence they are not aware?
46.Or that He will not seize them in their going to and fro, and they will notbe able to frustrate Him?
47.Or that He will not seize them, little by little destroying them?  Surelythy Lord is All-clement, All-compassionate.
48.Have they not regarded all things that God has created casting their shadowsto the right and to the left, bowing themselves before God in all lowliness?
49.To God bows everything in the heavens, and every creature crawling on theearth, and the angels. They have not waxed proud;
50.SUJDAH AYA @they fear their Lord above them, and they do what they arecommanded.
51.God says: `Take not to you two gods. He is only One God;so have awe of Me.'
52.To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and earth; His is the religion forever. Then will you fear other than God?
53.Whatsoever blessing you have, it comes from God; then when affliction visitsyou it is unto Him that you groan.
54.Then, when He removes the affliction from you, lo, a party of you assignassociates to their Lord,
%273% 55.that they may show unthankfulness for that We have given them. So take yourjoy; certainly you will soon know !
56.And they appoint a share of that We have provided them to what they know not.By God, you shall be questioned as to that you forged.
57.And they assign to God daughters; glory be to Him!--and they have their desire;
58.and when any of them is given the good tidings of a girl, his face isdarkened and he chokes inwardly,
59.as he hides him from the people because of the evil of the good tidings thathave been given unto him, whether he shall preserve it in humiliation, ortrample it into the dust. Ah, evil is that they judge!
60.Those who believe not in the world to come, theirs is the evil likeness;God's is the loftiest likeness; He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
61.If God should take men to task for their evildoing, He would not leave on theearth one creature that crawls; but He is deferring them to a term stated;and when their term is come they shall not put it back by a single hour norput it forward.
62.They assign to God that they themselves dislike; and their tongues describefalsehood, that the reward most fair shall be theirs. Without any doubttheirs shall be the Fire, and they are hastened in.
63.By God, assuredly We sent Messengers to nations before thee, but Satandecked out fair to them their deeds; he is their protector today, andthere yet awaits them a painful chastisement.
64.And We have not sent down upon thee the Book except that thou mayestmake clear to them that whereon they were at variance, and as a guidanceand as a mercy to a people who believe.
%274% 65.And it is God who sends down out of heaven water, and therewith revives theearth after it is dead. Surely in that is a sign for a peoplewho have ears.
66.And surely in the cattle there is a lesson for you; We give you to drink ofwhat is in their bellies, between filth and blood, pure milk, sweetto drinkers.
67.And of the fruits of the palms and the vines, you take therefrom anwholesome drink and intoxicant and a provision fair. Surely in that is asign for a people who understand.
68.And thy Lord revealed unto the bees, saying: `Take unto yourselves, of themountains, houses, and of the trees, and of what they are building.
69.Then eat of all manner of fruit, and follow the ways of your Lord easy to goupon.`Then comes there forth out of their bellies a drink of diverse hueswherein is healing for men. Surely in that is a sign for a peoplewho reflect.
70.God created you; then He will gather you to Him; and some of you will be keptback unto the vilest state of life, that after knowing somewhat, they mayknow nothing. God is All-knowing, All-powerful.
71.And God has preferred some of you over others in provision; but those thatwere preferred shall not give over their provision to that their right handspossess, so that they may be equal therein. What, and do they deny God'sblessing?
72.God has appointed for you of yourselves wives, and He has appointed for youof your wives sons and grandsons, and He has providedyou of the good things.What, do they believe in vanity, and do they disbelieve in God's blessing?
%275% 73.And do they serve, apart from God, that which has no power to provide themanything from the heavens and the earth and can do nothing?
74.So strike not any similitudes for God; surely God knows, and you know not.
75.God has struck a similitude: a servant possessed by his master, having nopower over anything, and one whom We have provided of Ourselves with aprovision fair, and he expends of it secretly and openly. Are they equal?Praise belongs to God!  Nay, most of them know not.
76.God has struck a similitude: two men, one of them dumb, having no power overanything, and he is a burden upon his master--wherever he despatches him,he brings no good. Is he equal to him who bids to justice, and ison a straight path?
77.To God belongs the Unseen in the heavens and in the earth. And the matter ofthe Hour is as a twinkling of the eye, or nearer. Surely God is powerfulover everything.
78.And it is God who brought you forth from your mothers' wombs, and Heappointed for you hearing, and sight, and hearts, that haply so you will bethankful.
79.Have they not regarded the birds, that are subjected in the air of heaven?Naught holds them but God; surely in that are signs for a people whobelieve.
%276% 80.And it is God who has appointed a place of rest for you of your houses, andHe has appointed for you of the skins of the cattle houses you find light onthe day that you journey, and on the day you abide, and of their wool, and oftheir fur, and of their hair furnishing and an enjoymentfor a while.
81.And it is God who has appointed for you coverings of the things He created,and He has appointed for you of the mountains refuges, and He has appointedfor you shirts to protect you from the heat, and shirts coats of mail toprotect you from your own mutual violence. Even so He perfects Hisblessing upon you, that haply you will surrender.
82.So, if they turn their backs, thine it is only to deliver themanifest Message.
83.They recognize the blessing of God, then they deny it, and the most of themare the unthankful.
84.And the day We shall raise up from every nation a witness, then to theunbelievers no leave shall be given, nor shall they be suffered to makeamends.
85.And when the evildoers behold the chastisement, it shall not be lightened forthem, and no respite shall be given them.
86.And when the idolaters behold their associates, they shall say, `Our Lord,these are our associates on whom we called apart from Thee.'  They will flingback at them the saying, `Surely, you are truly liars.'
87.And they will offer God surrender that day, and there shall go astray fromthem that they were forging.
%277% 88.Those that disbelieve and bar from the way of God--them We shall giveincrease of chastisement upon chastisement, for that they were doingcorruption.
89.And the day We shall raise up from every nation a witness against them fromamongst them, and We shall bring thee as a witness against those. And Wehave sent down on thee theBook making clear everything, and as a guidanceand a mercy, and as good tidings to those who surrender.
90.Surely God bids to justice and good-doing and giving to kinsmen; and Heforbids indecency, dishonour, and insolence, admonishing you, so that haplyyou will remember.
91.Fulfil God's covenant, when you make covenant, and break not the oaths afterthey have been confirmed, and you have made God your surety; surely God knowsthe things you do.
92.And be not as a woman who breaks her thread, after it is firmly spun,into fibres, by taking your oaths as mere mutual deceit, one nation beingmore numerous than another nation .God only tries you thereby; and certainlyHe will make clear to you upon the Day of Resurrection that whereon youwere at variance.
93.If God had willed, He would have made you one nation; but He leads astraywhom He will, and guides whom He will; and you will surely be questionedabout the things you wrought.
%278% 94.Take not your oaths as mere mutual deceit, lest any foot should slip after ithas stood firm, and you should taste evil, for that you barred from the wayof God, and lest there should await you a mighty chastisement.
95.And do not sell the covenant of God for a small price; surely what iswith God--that is better for you, did you but know.
96.What is with you comes to an end, but what is with God abides; and surelyWe shall recompense those who were patient their wage, according to the bestof what they did.
97.And whosoever does a righteous deed, be it male or female, believing, Weshall assuredly give him to live a goodly life; and We shall recompense themtheir wage, according to the best of what they did.
98.When thou recitest the Koran, seek refuge in God from the accursed Satan;
99.he has no authority over those who believe and trust in their Lord;
100.his authority is over those who take him for their friend and ascribeassociates to God.
101.And when We exchange a verse in the place of another verse--and God knowsvery well what He is sending down--they say, `Thou art a mere forger! `Nay,but the most of them have no knowledge.
102.Say: `The Holy Spirit sent it down from they Lord in truth, and to confirmthose who believe, and to be a guidance and good tidings to thosewho surrender.'
%279% 103.And We know very well that they say, `Only a mortal is teaching him.'  Thespeech of him at whom they hint is barbarous; and this is speech Arabic,manifest.
104.Those that believe not in the signs of God God will not guide; there awaitsthem a painful chastisement.
105.They only forge falsehood, who believe not in the signs of God, and those--they are the liars.
106.Whoso disbelieves in God, after he has believed--excepting him who has beencompelled, and his heart is still at rest in his belief--but whosoever'sbreast is expanded in unbelief, upon them shall rest anger from God, andthere awaits them a mighty chastisement;
107.that, because they have preferred the present life over the world to come,and that God guides not the people of the unbelievers.
108.Those--God has set a seal on their hearts, and their hearing, and their eyes,and those--they are the heedless ones;
109.without a doubt, in the world to come they will be the losers.
110.Then, surely thy Lord--unto those who have emigrated after persecution, thenstruggled and were patient--surely thy Lord thereafter is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
%280% 111.The day that every soul shall come disputing in its own behalf; and everysoul shall be paid in full for what it wrought, and they shall notbe wronged.
112.God has struck a similitude: a city that was secure, at rest, its provisioncoming to it easefully from every place, then it was unthankful for theblessings of God; so God let it taste the garment of hunger and of fear, forthe things that they were working.
113.There came indeed to them a Messenger from amongst them, but they cried himlies; so they were seized by the chastisement while they were evildoers.
114.So eat of what God has provided you lawful and good; and be you thankful forthe blessing of God, if it be Him that you serve.
115.These things only He has forbidden you: carrion, blood, the flesh of swine,what has been hallowed to other than God. Yet whoso is constrained, notdesiring nor transgressing, God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
116.And do not say, as to what your tongues falsely describe, `This is lawful,and this is forbidden,' so that you may forge against God falsehood; surelythose who forge against God falsehood shall not prosper.
117.A little enjoyment, then for them awaits a painful chastisement.
118.And those of Jewry--We have forbidden them what We related to thee before,and We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves.
%281% 119.Then, surely thy Lord--unto those who did evil in ignorance, then repentedafter that and put things right--surely thy Lord thereafter is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
120.Surely, Abraham was a nation obedient unto God, a man of pure faith and noidolater,
121.showing thankfulness for His blessings; He chose him, and He guided him to astraight path.
122.And We gave him in this world good, and in the world to come he shall beamong the righteous.
123.Then We revealed to thee: `Follow thou the creed of Abraham, a man of purefaith and no idolater.'
124.The Sabbath was only appointed for those who were at variance thereon; surelythy Lord will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection, touchingtheir differences.
125.Call thou to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and good admonition, and disputewith them in the better way. Surely thy Lord knows very well those who havegone astray from His way, and He knows very well those whoare guided.
126.And if you chastise, chastise even as you have been chastised; and yetassuredly if you are patient, better it is for those patient.
127.And be patient; yet is they patience only with the help of God. And do notsorrow for them, nor be thou straitened for what they devise.
128.Surely God is with those who are godfearing, and those who are good-doers.
%282% <17,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Glory be to Him, who carried His servant by night from the Holy Mosque to theFurther Mosque the precincts of which We have blessed, that We might show himsome of Our signs. He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.
2.And We gave Moses the Book, and made it a guidance to the Children of Israel:`Take not unto yourselves any guardian apart from Me.'
3.The seed of those We bore with Noah; he was a thankful servant.
4.And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Book: `You shall docorruption in the earth twice, and you shall ascend exceeding high in yourcorruption..'
5.So, when the promise of the first of these came to pass, We sent against youservants of Ours, men of great might, and they went through the habitations,and it was a promise performed.
6.Then We gave back to you the turn to prevail over them, and We succoured youwith wealth and children, and We made you a greater host.
7.`If you do good, it is your own souls you do good to, and if you do evilit is to them likewise.'  Then, when the promise of the second came to pass,We sent against you Our servants to discountenance you, and to enter theTemple, as they entered it the first time, and to destroy utterly that whichthey ascended to.
%283% 8.Perchance your Lord will have mercy upon you; but if you return, We shallreturn; and We have made Gehenna Hell a prison for the unbelievers.
9.Surely this Koran guides to the way that is straightest and gives goodtidings to the believers who do deeds of righteousness, that theirs shall bea great wage,
10.and that those who do not believe in the world to come--we have prepared forthem a painful chastisement.
11.Man prays for evil, as he prays for good; man is ever hasty.
12.We have appointed the night and the day as two signs; then We have blottedout the sign of the night, and made the sign of the day to see, and thatyou may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may know the number of theyears, and the reckoning; and everything We have distinguished verydistinctly.
13.And every man--We have fastened to him his bird of omen upon his neck; and Weshall bring forth for him, on the Day of Resurrection, a book he shall findspread wide open.
14.`Read thy book!  Thy soul suffices thee this day as a reckoneragainst thee.'
15.Whosoever is guided, is only guided to his own gain, and whosoever goesastray, it is only to his own loss; no soul laden bears the load of another.We never chastise, until We send forth a Messenger.
16.And when We desire to destroy a city, We command its men who live at ease,and they commit ungodliness therein, then the Word is realized against it,and We destroy it utterly.
17.How many generations We have destroyed after Noah!  Thy Lord suffices as onewho is aware of and sees the sins of His servants.
%284% 18.Whosoever desires this hasty world, We hasten for him therein what We willunto whomsoever We desire; then We appoint for him Gehenna Hell.wherein heshall roast, condemned and rejected.
19.And whosoever desires the world to come and strives after it as he should,being a believer--those, their striving shall be thanked.
20.Each We succour, these and those, from thy Lord's gift; and thy Lord's giftis not confined.
21.Behold, how We prefer some of them over others!  And surely the world to comeis greater in ranks, greater in preferment.
22.Set not up with God another god, or thou wilt sit condemned and forsaken.
23.Thy Lord has decreed you shall not serve any but Him, and to be good toparents, whether one or both of them attains old age with thee; say not tothem `Fie' neither chide them, but speak unto them words respectful,
24.and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say, `My Lord, havemercy upon them, as they raised me up when I was little.'
25.Your Lord knows very well what is in your hearts if you are righteous, for Heis All-forgiving to those who are penitent.
26.And give the kinsman his right, and the needy, and the traveller; and neversquander;
27.the squanderers are brothers of Satan, and Satan is unthankful to his Lord.
%285% 28.But if thou turnest from them, seeking mercy from thy Lord that thou hopestfor,then speak unto them gentle words.
29.And keep not thy hand chained to thy neck, nor outspread it widespreadaltogether, or thou wilt sit reproached and denuded destitute..
30.Surely thy Lord outspreads and straitens His provision unto whom He will;surely He is aware of and sees His servants.
31.And slay not your children for fear of poverty; We will provide for you andthem; surely the slaying of them is a grievous sin
32.And approach not fornication; surely it is an indecency, and evil as a way.
33.And slay not the soul God has forbidden, except by right. Whosoever is slainunjustly, We have appointed to his next-of-kin authority; but let him notexceed in slaying; he shall be helped.
34.And do not approach the property of the orphan save in the fairest manner,until he is of age.
35.And fulfil the covenant; surely the covenant shall be questioned of. Andfill up the measure when you measure, and weigh with the straight balance;that is better and fairer in the issue.
36.And pursue not that thou hast no knowledge of; the hearing, the sight, theheart--all of those shall be questioned of.
37.And walk not in the earth exultantly; certainly thou wilt never tear theearth open, nor attain the mountains in height.
38.All of that--the wickedness of it is hateful in the sight of thy Lord.
%286% 39.That is of the wisdom thy Lord has revealed to thee: set not up with Godanother god, or thou wilt be cast into Gehenna Hell, reproachedand rejected.
40.What, has your Lord favoured you with sons and taken to Himself from theangels females? Surely it is a monstrous thing you are saying!
41.We have turned about in this Koran, that they may remember; and it increasesthem only in aversion.
42.Say: `If there had been other gods with Him, as they say, in that caseassuredly they would have sought a way unto the Lord of the Throne.' Glory beto Him!
43.High indeed be He exalted above that they say!
44.The seven heavens and the earth, and whosoever in them is, extol Him; nothingis, that does not proclaim His praise, but you do not understand theirextolling.Surely He is All-clement, All-forgiving.
45.When thou recitest the Koran, We place between thee, and those who do notbelieve in the world to come, a curtain obstructing,
46.and We lay veils upon their hearts lest they understand it, and in their earsheaviness.And when thou mentionest thy Lord only in the Koran, they turn intheir traces in aversion.
47.We know very well how they listen when they listen to thee, and when theyconspire, when the evildoers say, `You are only following a man bewitched!'
48.Behold, how they strike similitudes for thee, and go astray, and cannotfind a way!
49.They say, `What, when we are bones and broken bits, shall we really be raisedup again in a new creation?'
%287% 50.Say: `Let you be stones, or iron,
51.or some creation yet more monstrous in your minds!' Then they will say,`Who will bring us back?' Say: `He who originated you the first time.'Then they will shake their heads at thee, and they will say, `When will itbe?' Say: `It is possible that it maybe nigh,
52.on the day when He will call you, and you will answer praising Him, andyou will think you have but tarried a little.'
53.And say to My servants, that they say words that are kindlier.For surelySatan provokes strife between them, and Satan is ever a manifest foe to man.54.Your Lord knows you very well; if He will, He will have mercy on you,or, if He will, He will chastise you.We sent thee not to be a guardianover them.
55.And thy Lord knows very well all who are in the heavens and the earth;and We have preferred some Prophets over others; and We gave to DavidPsalms.
56.Say: `Call on those you asserted apart from Him; they have no powerto remove affliction from you, or to transfer it.'
57.Those they call upon are themselves seeking the means to come to their Lord,which of them shall be nearer, they hope for His mercy, and fear Hischastisement.Surely thy Lord's chastisement is a thing to beware of.
58.No city is there, but We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection, orWe shall chastise it with a terrible chastisement; that is in the Bookinscribed.
%288% 59.Naught prevented Us from sending the signs but that the ancients cried liesto them; and We brought Thamood the She-camel visible, but they did herwrong.And We do not send the signs, except to frighten.
60.And when We said to thee, `Surely thy Lord encompasses men,' and We madethe vision that We showed thee and the tree cursed in the Koran to be onlya trial for men; and We frighten them, but it only increases them in greatinsolence.
61.And when We said to the angels, `Bow yourselves to Adam'; so they bowedthemselves, save Iblis; he said, `Shall I bow myself unto one Thou hastcreated of clay?'
62.He said, `What thinkest Thou? This whom Thou hast honoured above me--if Thoudeferrest me to the Day of Resurrection I shall assuredly master his seed,save a few.'
63.Said He, `Depart! Those of them that follow thee--surely Gehenna Hell.shall be your recompense, an ample recompense!
64.And startle whomsoever of them thou canst with thy voice; and rallyagainst them thy horsemen and thy foot, and share with them in their wealthand their children, and promise them!' But Satan promises them naught,except delusion.
65.`Surely over My servants thou shalt have no authority.' Thy Lord suffices asa guardian.
66.Your Lord it is who drives for you the ships on the sea that you may seek Hisbounty; surely He is All-compassionate towards you.
%289% 67.And when affliction visits you upon the sea, then there go astray those onwhom you call except Him; and when He delivers you to land, you turn away;man is ever unthankful.
68.Do you feel secure that He will not cause the shore to swallow you up, orloose against you a squall of pebbles, then you will find no guardian foryou?
69.Or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into it a second time,and loose against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for yourthanklessness, then you will find no prosecutor for you against Us?
70.We have honoured the Children of Adam and carried them on land and sea, andprovided them with good things, and preferred them greatly over many of thoseWe created.
71.On the day when We shall call all men with their record, and whoso is givenhis book in his right hand--those shall read their book, and they shall notbe wronged a single date-thread.
72.And whosoever is blind in this world shall be blind in the world to come,and he shall be even further astray from the way.
73.Indeed they were near to seducing thee from that We revealed to thee, thatthou mightest forge against Us another, and then they would surely have takenthee as a friend;
74.and had We not confirmed thee, surely thou wert near to inclining unto thema very little;
75.then would We have let thee taste the double of life and the double of death;and then thou wouldst have found none to help thee against Us.
%290% 76.Indeed they were near to startling thee from the land, to expel thee from it,and then they would have tarried after thee only a little--
77.the wont of those We sent before thee of Our Messengers; thou wilt find nochange to Our wont.
78.Perform the prayer at the sinking of the sun to the darkening of the nightand the recital of dawn; surely the recital of dawn is witnessed.
79.And as for the night, keep vigil a part of it, as a work of supererogationfor thee; it may be that thy Lord will raise thee up to a laudable station.
80.And say: `My Lord, lead me in with a just ingoing, and lead me out with ajust outgoing; grant me authority from Thee, to help me.'
81.And say: `The truth has come, and falsehood has vanished away; surelyfalsehood is ever certain to vanish.'
82.And We send down, of the Koran, that which is a healing and a mercy to thebelievers; and the unbelievers it increases not, except in loss.
83.And when We bless man, he turns away, and withdraws aside; but when evilvisits him, he is in despair.
84.Say: `Every man works according to his own manner; but your Lord knows verywell what man is best guided as to the way.'
85.They will question thee concerning the Spirit.Say: `The Spirit is of thebidding of my Lord.You have been given of knowledge nothing except alittle.'
86.If We willed, We could take away that We have revealed to thee, then thouwouldst find none thereover to guard thee against Us,
%291% 87.excepting by some mercy of thy Lord; surely His favour to thee is great.
88.Say: `If men and jinn banded together to produce the like of this Koran,they would never produce its like, not though they backed one another.'
89.We have indeed turned about for men in this Koran every manner of similitude;yet most men refuse all but unbelief.
90.They say, `We will not believe thee till thou makest a spring to gush forthfrom the earth for us,
91.or till thou possessest a garden of palms and vines, and thou makest riversto gush forth abundantly all amongst it,
92.or till thou makest heaven to fall, as thou assertest, on us in fragments,or thou bringest God and the angels as a surety,
93.or till thou possessest a house of gold ornament, or till thou goest up intoheaven; and we will not believe thy going up tillthou bringest down on usa book that we may read.Say: `Glory be to my Lord! Am I aught but amortal, a Messenger?'
94.And naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them, butthat they said, `Has God sent forth a mortal as Messenger?'
95.Say: `Had there been in the earth angels walking at peace, We would have sentdown upon them out of heaven an angel as Messenger.'
96.Say: `God suffices as a witness between me and you; surely He is aware of andsees His servants.'
%292% 97.Whomsoever God guides, he is rightly guided; and whom He leads astray--thouwilt not find for them protectors, apart from Him And We shall muster them onthe Resurrection Day upon their faces, blind, dumb, deaf; their refuge shallbe Gehenna Hell., and whensoever it abates We shall increase for themthe Blaze.
98.That is their recompense because they disbelieved in Our signs and said,`What, when we are bones and broken bits, shall we really be raised up againin a new creation?'
99.Have they not seen that God, who created theheavens and earth, is powerfulto create the like of them? He has appointed for them a term, no doubt ofit; yet the unbelievers refuse all but unbelief.
100.Say: `If you possessed the treasuries of my Lord's mercy, yet would you holdback for fear of expending; and man is ever niggardly.'
101.And We gave Moses nine signs, clear signs.Ask the Children of Israel whenhe came to them, and Pharaoh said to him, `Moses, I think thou artbewitched.'
102.He said, `Indeed thou knowest that none sent these down, except the Lordof the heavens and earth, as clear proofs; and, Pharaoh, I think thou artaccursed.'
103.He desired to startle them from the land; and We drowned him and those withhim, all together.
104.And We said to the Children of Israel after him, `Dwell in the land; andwhen the promise of the world to come comes to pass, We shall bring youa rabble.'
%293% 105.With the truth We have sent it down, and with the truth it has come down;and We have sent thee not, except good tidings to bear,and warning;
106.and aKoran We have divided, for thee to recite it to mankind at intervals,and We have sent it down successively.
107.Say: `Believe in it, or believe not; those who were given the knowledgebefore it when it is recited to them, fall down upon their facesprostrating,
108.and say, "Glory be to our Lord! Our Lord's promise is performed."
109.SUJDAH AYA @And they fall down upon their faces weeping; and it increasesthem in humility.'
110.Say: `Call upon God, or call upon the Merciful; whichsoever you call upon, toHim belong the Names Most Beautiful.' And be thou not loud in thy prayer,nor hushed therein, but seek thou for a way between that.
111.And say: `Praise belongs to God, who has not taken to Him a son, and who hasnot any associate in the Kingdom, nor any protector out of humbleness.' Andmagnify Him with repeated magnificats.
<18,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Praise belongs to God who has sent down upon His servant the Bookand has not assigned unto it any crookedness;
2.right, to warn of great violence from Him, and to give good tidings unto thebelievers, who do righteous deeds, that theirs shall be a goodly wage
3.therein to abide for ever,
4.and to warn those who say, `God has taken to Himself a son';
%294% 5.they have no knowledge of it, they nor their fathers; a monstrous word it is,issuing out of their mouths; they say nothing but a lie.
6.Yet perchance, if they believe not in this tiding, thou wilt consume thyself,following after them, of grief.
7.We have appointed all that is on the earth for an adornment for it, and thatWe may try which of them is fairest in works;
8.and We shall surely make all that is on it barren dust.
9.or dost thou think the Men of the Cave and Er-Rakeem were among Our signs awonder?
10.When the youths took refuge in the Cave saying, `Our Lord, give us mercy fromThee, and furnish us with rectitude in our affair.'
11.Then We smote their ears many years in the Cave
12.Afterwards We raised them up again, that We might know which of the twoparties would bettercalculate the while they had tarried.
13.We will relate to thee their tidings truly.They were youths who believedin their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.
14.And We strengthened their hearts, when they stood up and said, `Our Lord isthe Lord of the heavens and earth; we will not call upon any god, apartfrom Him, or then we had spoken outrage.
15.These our people have taken to them other gods, apart from Him.Ah, if onlythey would bring some clear authority regarding them! But who does greaterevil than he who forges against God a lie?
%295% 16.So, when you have gone apart from them and that they serve, excepting God,take refuge in the Cave, and your Lord will unfold to you of His mercy, andwill furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair.'
17.And thou mightest have seen the sun, when it rose, inclining from their Cavetowards the right, and, when it set, passing them by on the left, while theywere in a broad fissure of the Cave.That was one of God's signs; whomsoeverGod guides, he is rightly guided, and whomsoever He leads astray, thou wiltnot find for him a protector to direct.
18.Thou wouldst have thought them awake, as they lay sleeping, while We turnedthem now to the right, now to the left, and their dog stretching its paws onthe threshold.Hadst thou observed them surely thou wouldst have turned thyback on them in flight, and been filled with terror of them.
19.And even so We raised them up again that they might question one another.One of them said, `How long have you tarried?' They said, `We have tarrieda day, or part of a day.' They said, `Your Lord knows very well how longyou have tarried.Now send one of you forth with this silver to the city,and let him look for which of them has purest food, and bring you provisionthereof; let him be courteous, and apprise no man of you.
20.If they should get knowledge of you they will stone you, or restore you totheir creed, then you will not prosper ever.'
%296% 21.And even so We made them stumble upon them, that they might know that God'spromise is true, and that the Hour--there is no doubt of it.When they werecontending among themselves of their affair then they said, `Build over thema building; their Lord knows of them very well.' Said those who prevailedover their affair, `We will raise over them a place of worship.'
22.They will say, `Three; and their dog was the fourth of them.' They will say,`Five; and their dog was the sixth of them.' guessing at the Unseen.Theywill say, `Seven; and their dog was the eighth of them.' Say: `My Lord knowsvery well their number, and none knows them, except a few.' So do notdispute with them, except in outward disputation, and ask not any of them fora pronouncement on them.
23.And do not say, regarding anything, `I am going to do that tomorrow,'
24.but only, `If God will'; and mention thy Lord, when thou forgettest, andsay, `It may be that my Lord will guide me unto something nearer torectitude than this.'
25.And they tarried in the Cave three hundred years, and to that they addednine more.
26.Say: `God knows very well how long they tarried.To Him belongs the Unseenin the heavens and in the earth.How well He sees! How well He hears!They have no protector, apart from Him, and He associates in His governmentno one.'
27.Recite what has been revealed to thee of the Book of thy Lord; no man canchange His words.Apart from Him, thou wilt find no refuge.
%297% 28.And restrain thyself with those who call upon their Lord at morning andevening, desiring His countenance, and let not thine eyes turn away fromthem, desiring the adornment of the present life; and obey not him whoseheart We have made neglectful of Our remembrance so that he follows his ownlust, and his affair has become all excess.
29.Say: `The truth is from your Lord; so let whosoever will believe, and letwhosoever will disbelieve.' Surely We have prepared for the evildoers afire, whose pavilion encompasses them; if they call for succour, they will besuccoured with water like molten copper, that shall scald their faces--howevil a potion, and how evil a resting-place!
30.Surely those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness--surely We leave notto waste the wage of him who does good works;
31.those--their shall be Gardens of Eden, underneath which rivers flow; thereinthey shall be adorned with bracelets of gold, and they shall be robed ingreen garments of silk and brocade, therein reclining upon couches--O, howexcellent a reward! And O, how fair a resting-place!
32.And strike for them a similitude: two men.To one of them We assigned twogardens of vines, and surrounded them with palm-trees, and between them Weset a sown field;
33.each of the two gardens yielded its produce and failed naught in any wise;and We caused to gush amidst them a river.
34.So he had fruit; and he said to his fellow, as he was conversing with him,`I have more abundance of wealth than thou and am mightier inrespect of men.'
%298% 35.And he entered his garden, wronging himself; he said, `I do not think thatthis will ever perish;
36.I do not think that the Hour is coming; and if I am indeed returned to myLord, I shall surely find a better resort than this.'
37.Said his fellow, as he was conversing with him, `What, disbelievest thou inHim who created thee of dust, then of a sperm-drop, then shaped thee asa man?
38.But lo, He is God, my Lord, and I will not associate with my Lord any one.
39.Why, when thou wentest into thy garden, didst thou not say, "As God will;there is no power except in God"? If thou seest me, that I am less than thouin wealth and children,
40.yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than thy garden, and loose onit a thunderbolt out of heaven, so that in the morning it will be a slopeof dust,
41.or in the morning the water of it will be sunk into the earth, so that thouwilt not be able to seek it out.'
42.And his fruit was all encompassed, and in the morning he was wringinghis hands for that he had expended upon it, and it was fallen down uponits trellises, and he was saying, `Would I had not associated with my Lordany one!'
43.But there was no host to help him, apart from God, and he was helpless.
44.Thereover protection belongs only to God the True; He is best rewarding, bestin the issue.
45.And strike for them the similitude of the present life: it is as water thatWe send down out of heaven, and the plants of the earth mingle with it; andin the morning it is straw the winds scatter; and God is omnipotent overeverything.
%299% 46.Wealth and sons are the adornment of the present world; but the abidingthings, the deeds of righteousness, are better with God in reward, and betterin hope.
47.And on the day We shall set the mountains in motion, and thou seest the earthcoming forth, and We muster them so that We leave not so much as one ofthem behind;
48.and they shall be presented before their Lord in ranks--`You have come to Us,as We created you upon the first time; nay, you asserted We should notappoint for you a tryst.'
49.And the Book shall be set in place; and thou wilt see the sinners fearful atwhat is in it, and saying, `Alas for us! How is it with this Book, that itleaves nothing behind, small or great, but it has numbered it?' And theyshall find all they wrought present, and thy Lord shall not wrong anyone.
50.And when We said to the angels, `Bow yourselves to Adam'; so they bowedthemselves, save Iblis; he was one of the jinn, and committed ungodlinessagainst his Lord's command.What, and do you take him and his seedto be your friends, apart from Me, and they an enemy to you? How evilis that exchange for the evildoers!
51.I made them not witnesses of the creation of the heavens and earth,neither of the creation of themselves; I would not ever take those who leadothers astray to be My supporters.
52.And on the day He shall say, `Call on My associates whom you asserted'; andthen they shall call on them, but they will not answer them, and We shallset a gulf between them.
53.Then the evildoers will see the Fire, and think that they are about to fallinto it, and will find no escape from it.
%300% 54.We have indeed turned about for men in this Koran every manner of similitude;man is the most disputatious of things.
55.And naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came unto them,and seeking their Lord's forgiveness, but that the wont of the ancientsshould come upon them, or that the chastisement should come upon themface to face.
56.And We send not the Envoys, but good tidings to bear, and warning.Yet dothe unbelievers dispute with falsehood, that they may rebut thereby thetruth.They have taken My signs, and what they are warned of, in mockery.
57.And who does greater evil than he who, being reminded of the signs of hisLord, turns away from them and forgets what his hands have forwarded?Surely We have laid veils on their hearts lest they understand it, and intheir ears heaviness; and though thou callest them to the guidance, yet theywill not be guided ever.
58.But thy Lord is the All-forgiving, full of mercy.If He should take themto task for that they have earned, He would hasten for them the chastisement;but they have a tryst, from which they will findno escape.
59.And those cities, We destroyed them when they did evil, and appointed fortheir destruction a tryst.
60.And when Moses said to his page, `I will not give up until I reach themeeting of the two seas, though I go on for many years.'
61.Then, when they reached their meeting, they forgot their fish, and it tookits way into the sea, burrowing.
%301% 62.When they had passed over, he said to his page, `Bring us our breakfast;indeed, we have encountered weariness from this our journey.'
63.He said, `What thinkest thou? When we took refuge in the rock, then I forgotthe fish--and it was Satan himself that made me forget it so that I shouldnot remember it--and so it took its way into the sea in a mannermarvellous.'
64.Said he, `This is what we were seeking!' And so they returned upon theirtracks, retracing them.
65.Then they found one of Our servants unto whom We had given mercy from Us, andWe had taught him knowledge proceeding from Us.
66.Moses said to him, `Shall I follow thee so that thou teachest me, of whatthou hast been taught, right judgment?'
67.Said he, `Assuredly thou wilt not be able to bear with me patiently.
68.And how shouldst thou bear patiently that thou hast never encompassedin thy knowledge?
69.`He said, `Yet thou shalt find me, if God will, patient; and I shall notrebel against thee in anything.'
70.Said he, `Then if thou followest me, question me not on anythinguntil I myself introduce the mention of it to thee.'
71.So they departed; until, when they embarked upon the ship, he made a hole init.He said, `What, hast thou made a hole in it so as to drown itspassengers? Thou hast indeed done a grievous thing.'
72.Said he, `Did I not say that thou couldst never bear with me patiently?'
73.He said, `Do not take me to task that I forgot, neither constrain me to do athing too difficult.'
74.So they departed; until, when they met a lad, he slew him.He said, `What,hast thou slain a soul innocent, and that not to retaliate for a soul slain?Thou hast indeed done a horrible thing.'
%302% 75.Said he, `Did I not say that thou couldst never bear with mepatiently?'
76.He said, `If I question thee on anything after this, then keep me company nomore; thou hast already experienced excuse sufficient on my part.'
77.so they departed; until, when they reached the people of a city, they reachedthe people of a city, they asked the people for food, but they refused toreceive them hospitably.There they found a wall about to tumble down, andso he set it up.He said, `If thou hadst wished, thou couldst have taken awage or that.'
78.Said he, `This is the parting between me and thee.Now I will tell theethe interpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently.
79.As for the ship, it belonged to certain poor men, who toiled upon the sea;and I desired to damage it, for behind them there was a king who was seizingevery ship by brutal force.
80.As for the lad, his parents were believers; and we were afraid he wouldimpose on them insolence and unbelief;
81.so we desired that their Lord should give to them in exchange one better thanhe in purity, and nearer in tenderness.
82.As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan lads in the city, and under it wasa treasure belonging to them.Their father was a righteous man; and thy Lorddesired that they should come of age and then bring forth their treasure as amercy from thy Lord.I did it not of my own bidding.This is theinterpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently.'
83.They will question thee concerning Dhool Karnain.Say: `I will recite to youa mention of him.'
%303% 84.We established him in the land, and We gave him a way to everything;
85.and he followed a way
86.until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it setting in a muddyspring, and he found nearby a people.We said, `O Dhool Karnain, either thoushalt chastise them, or thou shalt take towards them a way of kindness.'
87.He said, `As for the evildoer, him we shall chastise, then he shall bereturned to his Lord and He shall chastise him with a horrible chastisement.
88.But as for him who believes, and does righteousness, he shall receive asrecompense the reward most fair, and we shall speak to him, of ourcommand, easiness.'
89.Then he followed a way
90.until, when he reached the rising of the sun, he found it rising upon apeople for whom we had not appointed any veil to shade themfrom it.
91.So; and We encompassed in knowledge what was with him.
92.Then he followed a way
93.until, when he reached between the two barriers, he found this side of them apeople scarcely able to understand speech.
94.They said, `O Dhool Karnain, behold, Gog and Magog are doing corruption inthe earth; so shall we assign to thee a tribute, against thy setting up abarrier between us and between them?'
95.He said, `That wherein my Lord has established me is better; so aid meforcefully, and I will set up a rampart between you andbetween them.
96.Bring me ingots of iron!' Until, when he had made all level between the twocliffs, he said, `Blow!' Until, when he had made it a fire, he said, `Bringme, that I may pour molten brass on it.'
97.So they were unable either to scale it or pierce it.
%304% 98.He said, `This is a mercy from my Lord.But when the promise of my Lordcomes to pass, He will make it into powder; and my Lord's promise isever true.'
99.Upon that day We shall leave them surging on one another, and the Trumpetshall be blown, and We shall gather them together,
100.and upon that day We shall present Gehenna Hell to theunbelievers
101.whose eyes were covered against My remembrance, and they were not ableto hear.
102.What, do the unbelievers reckon that they may take My servants as friends,apart from Me? We have prepared Gehenna Hell for the unbelievers'hospitality.
103.Say: `Shall We tell you who will be the greatest losers in their works?
104.Those whose striving goes astray in the present life, while they thinkthat they are working good deeds.
105.Those are they that disbelieve in the signs of their Lord and the encounterwith Him, their works have failed, and on the Day of Resurrection We shallnot assign to them anyweight.
106.That is their recompense--Gehenna Hell for that they were unbelievers andtook My signs and My messengers in mockery.
107.But those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness--the Gardens of Paradiseshall be their hospitality,
108.therein to dwell forever, desiring no removal out of them.'
109.Say: `If the sea were ink for the Words of my Lord, the sea would be spentbefore the Words of my Lord are spent, though We brought replenishment thelike of it.'
110.Say: `I am only a mortal the like of you; it is revealed to me that your Godis One God.So let him, who hopes for the encounter with his Lord workrighteousness, and not associate with his Lord's service anyone.'
%305% <19,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Kaf Ha Ya Ain Sad
2.The mention of thy Lord's mercy unto His servant Zachariah;
3.when he called upon his Lord secretly
4.saying, `O my Lord, behold the bones within me are feeble and my head is allaflame with hoariness.And in calling on Thee, my Lord, I have never beenhitherto unprosperous.
5.And now I fear my kinsfolk after I am gone; and my wife is barren.So giveme, from Thee, a kinsman
6.who shall be my inheritor and the inheritor of the House of Jacob; and makehim, my Lord, well-pleasing.'
7.`O Zachariah, we give thee good tidings of a boy, whose name is John. Nonamesake have We given him aforetime.'
8.He said, `O my Lord, how shall I have a son, seeing my wife is barren, and Ihave attained to the declining of old age?'
9.Said He, `So it shall be; thy Lord says, "Easy is that for Me, seeing that Icreated thee aforetime, when thou wast nothing." '
10.He said, `Lord, appoint to me some sign.' Said He, `Thy sign is that thoushalt not speak to men, though being without fault,three nights.'
11.So he came forth unto his people from the Sanctuary, then he made signal tothem, `Give you glory at dawn and evening.'
%306% 12.`O John, take the Book forcefully'; and We gave him judgment, yet alittle child,
13.and a tenderness from Us, and purity; and he was godfearing,
14.andcherishing his parents, not arrogant, rebellious.
15.`Peace be upon him, the day he was born, and the day he dies , and the day heis raised up alive!'
16.And mention in the Book Mary when she withdrew from her peopleto an eastern place,
17.and she took a veil apart from them; then We sent unto her Our Spiritthat presented himself to her a man without fault.
18.She said, `I take refuge in the All-merciful from thee! If thoufearest God....'
19.He said, `I am but a messenger come from thy Lord, to give theea boy most pure.'
20.She said, `How shall I have a son whom no mortal has touched, neitherhave I been unchaste?'
21.He said, `Even so thy Lord has said: "Easy is that for Me; and that We mayappoint him a sign unto men and a mercy from Us; it is a thing decreed." '
22.So she conceived him, and withdrew with him to a distant place.
23.And the birthpangs surprised her by the trunk of the palm-tree.She said,`Would I had died ere this, and become a thing forgotten!'
24.But the one that was below her called to her, `Nay, do not sorrow; see, thyLord has set below thee a rivulet.
25.Shake also to thee the palm-trunk, and there shall come tumbling upon theedates fresh and ripe.
%307% 26.Eat therefore, and drink, and be comforted; and if thou shouldst see anymortal, say, "I have vowed to the All-merciful a fast, and today I will notspeak to any man." '
27.Then she brought the child to her folk carrying him; and they said,`Mary, thou hast surely committed a monstrous thing!
28.Sister of Aaron, thy father was not a wicked man, nor was thy mothera woman unchaste.'
29.Mary pointed to the child then; but they said, `How shall we speak to one whois still in the cradle, a little child?'
30.He said, `Lo I am God's servant; God has given me the Book, andmade me a Prophet.
31.Blessed He has made me, wherever I may be; and He has enjoined me to pray,and to give the alms, so long as I live,
32.and likewise to cherish my mother; He has not made me arrogant,unprosperous.
33.Peace be upon me, the day I was born , and the day I die, and the day I amraised up alive!'
34.That is Jesus, son of Mary, in word of truth, concerning whichthey are doubting.
35.It is not for God to take a son unto Him.Glory be to Him! When He decreesa thing, He but says to it `Be,' and it is.
36.Surely God is my Lord, and your Lord; so serve you Him.This isa straight path.
37.But the parties have fallen into variance among themselves; then woe to thosewho disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day.
38.How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us! But theevildoers even today are in error manifest.
%308% 39.Warn thou them of the day of anguish, when the matter shall be determined,and they yet heedless and unbelieving.
40.Surely We shall inherit the earth and all that are upon it, and unto Us theyshall be returned.
41.And mention in the Book Abraham; surely he was a true man, a Prophet.
42.When he said to his father, `Father, why worshippest thou that which neitherhears nor sees, nor avails thee anything?
43.Father, there has come to me knowledge such as came not to thee; so followme, and I will guide thee on a level path.
44.Father, serve not Satan; surely Satan is a rebel against the All-merciful.
45.Father, I fear that some chastisement from the All-merciful will smite thee,so that thou becomest a friend to Satan.'
46.Said he, `What, art thou shrinking from my gods, Abraham? Surely, if thougivest not over, I shall stone thee; so forsake me now for some while.'
47.He said, `Peace be upon thee! I will ask my Lord to forgive thee; surely Heis ever gracious to me.
48.Now I will go apart from you and that you call upon, apart from God; I willcall upon my Lord, and haply I shall not be, in calling upon my Lord,unprosperous.'
49.So, when he went apart from them and that they were serving, apart from God,We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and each We made a Prophet;
50.and We gave them of Our mercy, and We appointed unto them a tongue oftruthfulness, sublime.
51.And mention in the Book Moses; he was devoted, and he was a Messenger, aProphet.
%309% 52.We called to him from the right side of the Mount, and We brought him near incommunion.
53.And We gave him his brother Aaron , of Our mercy, a Prophet.
54.And mention in the Book Ishmael ; he was true to his promise, and he wasa Messenger, a Prophet.
55.He bade his people to pray and to give the alms, and he was pleasing to hisLord.
56.And mention in the Book Idris; he was a true man, a Prophet.
57.We raised him up to a high place.
58.SUJDAH AYA @These are they whom God has blessed among the Prophets of theseed of Adam, and of those We bore with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham andIsrael, and of those We guided and chose.When the signs of the All-mercifulwere recited to them, they fell down prostrate, weeping.
59.Then there succeeded after them a succession who wasted the prayer, andfollowed lusts; so they shall encounter error
60.Save him who repents, and believes, and does a righteous deed; those--theyshall enter Paradise, and they shall notbe wronged anything;
61.Gardens of Eden that the All-merciful promised His servants in the Unseen;His promise is ever performed.
62.There they shall hear no idle talk, but only `Peace.' There they shall havetheir provision at dawn and evening.
63.That is Paradise which We shall give as an inheritance to those of Ourservants who are godfearing.
64.We come not down, save at the commandment of thy Lord.To Him belongs allthat is before us, and all that is behind us, and all between that.
%310% 65.And thy Lord is never forgetful, Lord He of the heavens and earth and allthat is between them.So serve Him, and be thou patient in His service;knowest thou any that can be named with His Name?
66.Man says, `What, when I am dead shall I then be brought forth alive?'
67.Will not man remember that We created him aforetime, when he was nothing?
68.Now, by thy Lord, We shall surely muster them, and the Satans, then We shallparade them about Gehenna Hell hobbling on their kness.
69.Then We shall pluck forth from every party whichever of them was the mosthardened in disdain of the All-merciful;
70.then We shall know very well those most deserving to burn there.
71.Not one of you there is, but he shall go down to it; that for thy Lordis a thing decreed, determined .
72.Then We shall deliver those that were godfearing; and the evildoers We shallleave there, hobbling on their knees.
73.When Our signs are recited to them as clear signs, the unbelievers say to thebelievers, `Which of the two parties is better in station, fairerin assembly?'
74.And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were fairer infurnishing and outward show!
75.Say: `Whosoever is in error, let the All-merciful prolong his term for him!Till, when they see that they were threatened, whether the chastisement, orthe Hour, then they shall surely know who is worse in place, and who isweaker in hosts.'
76.And God shall increase those who were guided in guidance; and the abidingthing, the deeds of righteousness, are better with thy Lord in reward, andbetter in return.
%311% 77.Hast thou seen him who disbelieves in Our signs and says,' Assuredly I shallbe given wealth and children'?
78.What, has he observed the unseen, or taken a covenant with the All-merciful?
79.No, indeed! We shall assuredly write down all that he says, and We shallprolong for him the chastisement;
80.and We shall inherit from him that he says, and he shall come toUs alone.
81.And they have taken to them other gods apart from God, that they might be forthem a might.
82.No, indeed! They shall deny their service, and they shall be against thempitted.
83.Hast thou not seen how We sent the Satans against the unbelievers, toprick them?
84.So hasten thou not against them; We are only numbering for them a number.
85.On the day that We shall muster the godfearing to the All-mercifulwith pomp
86.and drive the evildoers into Gehenna Hell herding,
87.having no power of intercession, save those who have taken with theAll-merciful covenant.
88.And they say, `The All-merciful has taken unto Himself a son.'
89.You have indeed advanced something hideous!
90.The heavens are wellnigh rent of it and the earth split asunder, and themountains wellnigh fall down crashing
91.for that they have attributed to the All-merciful a son;
92.and it behoves not the All-merciful to take a son.
93.None is there in the heavens and earth but he comes to the All-merciful as aservant;
94.He has indeed counted them, and He has numbered them exactly.
95.Every one of them shall come to Him upon the Day of Resurrection,all alone.
%312% 96.Surely those who believe and do deeds of righteousness--unto them theAll-merciful shall assign love.
97.Now We have made it easy by thy tongue that thou mayest bear good tidingsthereby to the godfearing, and warn a people stubborn.
98.And how many a generation We destroyed before them! Dost thou perceive somuch as one of them, or hear of them a whisper?
<20,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ta Ha
2.We have not sent down the Koran upon thee for thee to be unprosperous,
3.but only as a reminder to him who fears,
4.a revelation from Him who created the earth and the high heavens;
5.the All-compassionate Sat Himself upon the Throne;
6.to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that isbetween them, and all that is underneath the soil.
7.Be thou loud in thy speech, yet surely He knows the secret and that yet morehidden.
8.God--there is no god but He.To Him belong the Names Most Beautiful.
9.Hast thou received the story of Moses?
10.When he saw a fire, and said to his family, `Tarry you here; I observe afire.Perhaps I shall bring you a brand from it, or I shall find at the fireguidance.'
11.When he came to it, a voice cried, `Moses,
12.I am thy Lord; put off thy shoes; thou art in the holy valley, Towa.
%313% 13.I Myself have chosen thee; therefore give thou ear to this revelation.
14.Verily I am God; there is no god but I; therefore serve Me, and perform theprayer of My remembrance.
15.The Hour is coming; I would conceal it that every soul may be recompensedfor its labours.
16.Let none bar thee from it, that believes not init but follows after his owncaprice, of thou wilt perish.
17.What is that, Moses, thou hast in they right hand?'
18.`Why, it is my staff,' said Moses.`I lean upon it, and with it I beat downleaves to feed my sheep; other uses also I find in it.'
19.Said He, `Cast it down, Moses!'
20.and he cast it down, and behold it was a serpent sliding.
21.Said He, `Take it, and fear not; We will restore it to its first state.
22.Now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit; it shall come forth white, without evil.That is a second sign.
23.So We would show thee some of Our greatest signs.
24.Go to Pharaoh; he has waxed insolent.'
25.`Lord, open my breast,' said Moses,
26.`and do Thou ease for me my task.
27.Unloose the impediment from my speech knot upon my tongue,
28.that they may understand my words.
29.Appoint for me of my folk a familiar,
30.Aaron, my brother;
31.by him confirm my strength,
32.and associate him with me in my task.
33.So shall we glorify Thee,
34.and remember Thee abundantly.
35.Surely Thou seest into us.'
36.Said He, `Thou art granted, Moses, thy petition.
37.Already another time We favoured thee,
%314% 38.when We revealed what was revealed unto thy mother:
39."Cast him into the ark, and cast him into the river, and let the river throwhim up on the shore.And enemy of Mine and his shall take him."  And Iloaded on thee love from Me, and to be formed in My sight,
40.when thy sister went out, saying, "Shall I point you to one to have chargeof him?" So We returned thee to thy mother that she might rejoice, and notsorrow.Then thou slewest a living soul, and We delivered thee out of grief,and We tried thee with many trials.Many years among the people of Midianthou didst sojourn, then camest hither, Moses, according toa decree.
41.I have chosen thee for My service;
42.go therefore, thou and thy brother, with My signs, and neglect not toremember Me.
43.Go to Pharaoh, for he has waxed insolent;
44.yet speak gently to him, that haply he may be mindful , or perchance fear.'
45.`O our Lord,' said Moses and Aaron,' truly we fear he may exceed against us,or wax insolent.'
46.`Fear not,' said He.`Surely I shall be with you, hearing and seeing
47.So go you both to Pharaoh, and say, "We are the Messengers of thy Lord, sosend forth with us the Children of Israeland chastise them not; we have brought thee a sign from thy Lord; and peacebe upon him who follows the guidance!
48.It has been revealed to us that chastisement shall light upon him who crieslies and turns his back." '
49.Pharaoh said, `Who is your Lord, Moses?'
50.He said, `Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation, thenguided it.'
51.Pharaoh said, `And what of the former generation?'
%315% 52.Said Moses, `The knowledge of them is with my Lord, in a Book; my Lord goesnot astray, nor forgets--
53.He who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you, and therein threaded roadsfor you, and sent down water out of heaven, and therewith We have broughtforth divers kinds of plants.
54.Do you eat, and pasture your cattle! Surely in that are signs for menpossessing reason
55.Out of the earth We created you, and We shall restore you into it, and bringyou forth from it a second time.'
56.So We showed Pharaoh all Our signs, but he cried lies, and refused.57.`Hast thou come , Moses,' he said, `to expel us out of our landby thy sorcery ?58.We shall assuredly bring thee sorcery the like of it; therefore appoint atryst between us and thee, a place mutually agreeable, and we shall not failit, neither thou.'59.`Your tryst shall be upon the Feast Day.' said Moses.`Let the people bemustered at the high noon.'60.Pharaoh then withdrew, and gathered his guile.Thereafter he cameagain,61.and Moses said to them, `O beware! Forge not a lie against God, lest Hedestroy you with a chastisement.Whoso forges has ever failed.'62.and they disputed upon their plan between them, and communed secretly63.saying, `These two men are sorcerers and their purpose is to expel you out ofyour land by their sorcery, and to extirpate your justest way.64.So gather your guile; then come in battle-line.Whoever today gains theupper hand shall surely prosper.'%316% 65.They said, `Moses, either thou wilt cast, or we shall be thefirst to cast.'66.`No,' said Moses.`Do you cast!' And lo, it seemed to him, by their sorcery,their ropes and their staffs were sliding;67.and Moses conceived a fear within him.68.We said unto him, `Fear not; surely thou art the uppermost.69.Cast down what is in thy right hand, and it shall swallow what they havefashioned; for they have fashioned only the guile of a sorcerer, and thesorcerer prospers not, wherever he goes.'70.And the sorcerers cast themselves down prostrating.`We believe,' they said,`in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.'71.Pharaoh said, `Have you believed him before I gave you leave? Why, he is thechief of you, the same that taught you sorcery; I shall assuredly cut offalternately your hands and feet, then I shall crucify you upon the trunks ofpalm-trees; you shall know of a certainty which of us is more terrible inchastisement, and more abiding.'72.They said, `We will not prefer thee over the clear signs that have come tous, nor over Him who originated us.Decide then what thou wilt decide; thoucanst only decide touching this present life.
73.We believe in our Lord, that He may pardon us our offences, and the sorcerythou hast constrained us to practise; God is better, and more abiding.'
74.Whosoever comes unto his Lord a sinner, for him awaits Gehenna Hell whereinhe shall neither die nor live.
75.And whoso comes unto Him a believer having done deeds of righteousness,those--for them await the most sublime degrees;
76.Gardens of Eden, underneath which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever; thatis the recompense of the self-purified.
%317% 77.Also We revealed unto Moses, `Go with My servants by night; strike for them adry path in the sea, fearing not overtaking, neither afraid.'
78.Pharaoh followed them with his hosts, but they were overwhelmed by the sea;
79.so Pharaoh had led his people astray, and was no guide to them.
80.Children of Israel, We delivered you fromyour enemy; and We made covenantwith you upon the right side of the Mount, and sent down on you mannaand quails:
81.`Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you; but exceed nottherein, or My anger shall alight on you; and on whomsoever My anger alights,that man is hurled to ruin.
82.Yet I am All-forgiving to him who repents and believes, and doesrighteousness, and at last is guided.'
83.`What has sped thee far from thy people, Moses?'
84.`They are upon my tracks,' Moses said.`I have hastened, Lord, only that Imay please Thee.'
85.Said He, `We have tempted thy people since thou didst leave them.TheSamaritan has misled them into error.'
86.Then Moses returned very angry and sorrowful to his people, saying,`My people, did your Lord not promise a fair promise to you? Did the timeof the covenant seem so long to you, or did you desire that anger shouldalight on you from your Lord, so that you failed in your tryst with me?'
87.`We have not failed in our tryst with thee,' they said, `of our volition;but we were loaded with fardels, even the ornaments of the people, and wecast them, as the Samaritan also threw them, into the fire.'
%318% 88.Then he brought out for them a Calf, a mere body that lowed; and they said,`This is your god, and the god of Moses, whom he has forgotten.'
89.What? Did they not see that thing returned no speech unto them, neitherhad any power to hurt or profit them?
90.Yet Aaron had aforetime said to them, `My people, you have been tempted bythis thing, no more; surely your Lord is the All-merciful; therefore followme, and obey my commandment!'
91.`We will not cease,' they said, `to cleave to it, until Moses returnsto us.'
92.Moses said, `What prevented thee, Aaron, when thou sawest them in error,
93.so that thou didst not follow after me? Didst thou then disobey mycommandment?'
94.`Son of my mother,' Aaron said, `take me not by the beard, or the head!I was fearful that thou wouldst say, "Thou hast divided the Children ofIsrael, and thou hast not observed my word." '
95.Moses said,`And thou, Samaritan, what was thy business?'
96.`I beheld what they beheld not , ' he said, `and I seized a handful of dustfrom the messenger's track, and cast it into the thing.So my soul promptedme.'
97.`Depart!' said Moses.`It shall be thine all this life to cry "Untouchable!"And thereafter a tryst awaits thee thou canst not fail to keep. Behold thygod, to whom all the day thou wast cleaving! We will surely burn it andscatter its ashes into the sea.
98.Your God is only the One God; there is no god, but He alone who in Hisknowledge embraces everything.'
%319% 99.So We relate to thee stories of what has gone before, and We have given theea remembrance from Us.
100.Whosoever turns away from it, upon the Day of Resurrection He shall bear afardel,
101.therein abiding forever; how evil upon the Day of Resurrection thatburden for them !
102.On the day the Trumpet is blown; and We shall muster the sinners upon thatday with eyes staring,
103.whispering one to another, `You have tarried only ten nights.
104.`We know very well what they will say, when the justest of them in the waywill say, `You have tarried only a day.'
105.They will question thee concerning the mountains.Say: `My Lord will scatterthem as ashes;
106.then He will leave them a level hollow
107.wherein thou wilt see no crookedness neither any curving.'
108.On that day they will follow the Summoner in whom is no crookedness; voiceswill be hushed to the All-merciful, so that thou hearest naught but amurmuring.
109.Upon that day the intercession will not profit, save for him to whom theAll-merciful gives leave, and whose speech He approves.
110.He knows what is before them and behind them, and they comprehend Him not inknowledge.
111.And faces shall be humbled unto the Living, the Eternal.He will have failedwhose burden is of evildoing;
112.but whosoever does deeds of righteousness, being a believer, shall fearneither wrong nor injustice.
113.Even so We have sent it down as an Arabic Koran, and We have turned about init something of threats, thathaply they may be godfearing, or it may arousein them remembrance.
%320% 114.So high exalted be God, the true King! And hasten not with the Koran ere itsrevelation is accomplished unto thee; and say, `O my Lord, increase me inknowledge.'
115.And We made covenant with Adam before, but he forgot , and We found in him noconstancy.
116.And when We said to the angels, `Bow yourselves to Adam'; so they bowedthemselves, save Iblis; he refused.
117.Then We said, `Adam, surely this is an enemy to thee and thy wife.So lethim not expel you both from the Garden , so that thou are unprosperous.
118.It is assuredly given to thee neither to hunger therein, nor to go naked,
119.neither to thirst therein, nor to suffer the sun.'
120.Then Satan whispered to him saying, `Adam, shall I point thee to the Tree ofEternity, and a Kingdom that decays not?'
121.So the two of them ate of it, and their shameful parts revealed to them, andthey took to stitching upon themselves leaves of the Garden.And Adamdisobeyed his Lord, and sohe erred.
122.Thereafter his Lord chose him, and turned again unto him, and Heguided him.
123.Said He, `Get you down, both of you together, out of it, each of you anenemy to each; but if there comes to you from Me guidance, then whosoeverfollows My guidance shall not go astray, neither shall he be unprosperous;
124.but whosoever turns away from My remembrance, his shall be a life ofnarrowness, and on the Resurrection Day We shall raise him blind.'
125.He shall say, `O my Lord, why hast thou raised me blind, and I was wont tosee?'
%321% 126.God shall say, `Even so it is.Our signs came unto thee, and thou didstforget them; and so today thou art forgotten.'
127.So We recompense him who is prodigal and believes not in the signs of hisLord; and the chastisement of the world to come is more terrible andmore enduring.
128.Is it not a guidance to them, how many generations We destroyed before themin whose dwelling-places they walk? Surely in that are signs for menpossessing reason.
129.And but for a word that preceded from thy Lord, and a stated term, it hadbeen fastened.
130.So be thou patient under what they say, and proclaim thy Lord's praise beforethe rising of the sun, and before its setting, and proclaim thy Lord's praisein the watches of the night, and at the ends of the day; haply thou wilt bewell-pleasing.
131.Stretch not thine eyes to that We have given pairs of them to enjoy--theflower of the present life, that We may try them therein; and thy Lord'sprovision is better, and more enduring.
132.And bid thy family to pray, and be thou patient in it; We ask of thee noprovision, but it is We who provide thee.And the issue ultimate is togodfearing.
133.They say, `Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?' Has there notcome to them the clear sign of what is in the former scrolls?
134.Had We destroyed them with a chastisement aforetime, they would have said,`Our Lord, why didst Thou not send us a Messenger, so that we might havefollowed Thy signs before that we were humiliated and degraded?'
135.Say: `Every one is waiting; so wait, and assuredly you shall know who are thetravellers on the even path, and who is guided.'
%322% <21,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Nigh unto men has drawn their reckoning, while they in heedlessness are yetturning away;
2.no Remembrance from their Lord coms to them lately renewed, but they listento it yet playing,
3.diverted their hearts.The evildoers whisper one to another, `Is this aughtbut a mortal like to yourselves?  What, will you take to sorcery with youreyes open?'
4.He says: `My Lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth, and He isthe All-hearing, the All-knowing.'
5.Nay, but they say: `A hotchpotch of nightmares! Nay, he has forged it; nay,he is a poet!Now therefore let him bring us a sign, even as the ancient ones were sentas Messengers.'
6.Not one city that We destroyed before them believed; what then, will they notbelieve?
7.And We sent none before thee, but men to whom We made revelation--questionthe people of the Remembrance, if you do not know--
8.nor did we fashion them as bodies that ate not food, neither werethey immortal;
9.then We made true the promise we gave them and we delivered them, andwhomsoever we would; and We destroyed the prodigal.
10.Now We have sent down to you a Book wherein is your Remembrance; will you notunderstand?
%323% 11.How many a city that was evildoing We have shattered, and set up after itanother people!
12.Then, when they perceived Our might, behold, they ran headlong out of it.
13.`Run not! Return you unto the luxury that you exulted in, and yourdwelling-places; haply you shall be questioned.'
14.They said, `Alas for us! We have been evildoers.'
15.So they ceased not to cry, until We made them stubble, silentand still.
16.We created not the heaven and the earth, and whatsoever between them is,as playing;
17.had We desired to take to Us a diversion We Would have taken it to Us fromOurselves, had We done aught.
18.Nay, but We hurl the truth against falsehood and it prevails over it, andbehold, falsehood vanishes away.Then woe to you for that you describe!
19.To Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth; and those who arewith Him wax not too proud to do Him service neither grow weary,
20.glorifying Him by night and in the daytime and never failing.
21.Or have they taken gods out of the earth who raise the dead?
22.Why, were there gods in earth and heaven other then God, they would surely goto ruin; so glory be to God, the Lord of the Throne, above that theydescribe!
23.He shall not be questioned as to what He does, but they shall be questioned.
24.Or have they taken gods apart from Him? Say: `Bring your proof! This is theRemembrance of him who is with me, and the Remembrance of those before me.Nay, but the most part of them know not the truth, so therefore they areturning away.'
%324% 25.And We sent never a Messenger before thee except that We revealed to him,saying, `There is no god but I; so serve Me.'
26.They say: `The All-merciful has taken to Him a son.' Glory be to Him! Nay,but theyare honoured servants
27.that outstrip Him not in speech, and perform as He commands.
28.He knows what is before them and behind them, and they intercede not save forhim with whom He is well-pleased, and they tremble in awe of Him.
29.If any of them says, `I am a god apart from Him', such a one We recompensewith Gehenna Hell.; even so We recompense the evildoers.
30.Have not the unbelievers then beheld that the heavens and the earth were amass all sewn up, and then We unstitched them and of water fashioned everyliving thing? Will they not believe?
31.And We set in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with them, and Weset in it ravines to serve as ways, that haply so they may be guided;
32.and We set up the heaven as a roof well-protected; yet still from Our signsthey are turning away.
33.It is He who created the night and the day, the sun and the moon,each swimming in a sky.
34.We have not assigned to any mortal before thee to live forever; therefore ifthou diest, will they live forever?
35.Everysoul shall taste of death; and We try you with evil and good for atesting, then unto Us you shall be returned.
%325% 36.When the unbelievers behold thee, they take thee only for mockery: `Ha, isthis the one who makes mention of your gods?' Yet they in the Remembrance ofthe All-merciful are unbelievers.
37.Man was created of haste is a creature of haste..Assuredly I shall showyou My signs; so demand not that I make haste.
38.They say, `And when shall the promise come to pass, if you speak truly?'
39.If the unbelievers but knew when that they shall not ward off the Fire fromtheir faces nor from their backs, neither shall they be helped!
40.Nay, but it shall come upon them suddenly, dumbfounding them, and they shallnot be able to repel it, nor shall they be respited.
41.Messengers indeed were mocked at before thee, but those that scoffed at themwere encompassed by that they mocked at.
42.Say: `Who shall guard you by night and in the daytime from the All-merciful?'Nay, but from the Remembrance of their Lord they are turning away.
43.Or have they gods that shall defend them apart from Us? Why, they are notable to help themselves, nor shall they be guarded in safety from Us.
44.Nay, but Ourselves gave these and their fathers enjoyment of days, untiltheir life had lasted long while upon them.What, do they not see how Wecome to the land, diminishing it in its extremities? Or are they thevictors?
%326% 45.Say: `I warn you only by the Revelation'; but they that are deaf do not hearthe call when they are warned.
46.If but a breath of thy Lord's chastisement touched them, they would surelysay, `Alas for us! We were evildoers.'
47.And We shall set up the just balances for the Resurrection Day, so that notone soul shall be wronged anything; even if it be the weight of one grain ofmustard-seed We shall produce it, and sufficient are We for reckoners.
48.We gave Moses and Aaron the Salvation and a Radiance, and a Remembrancefor the godfearing
49.such as fear God in the Unseen, trembling because of the Hour.
50.And this is a blessed Remembrance that We have sent down; so are younow denying it?
51.We gave Abraham aforetime his rectitude--for We knew him--
52.when he said to his father and his people, `What are these statues unto whichyou are cleaving?
53.They said, `We found our fathers serving them.'
54.He said, `Then assuredly you and your fathers have been in manifest error.'
55.They said, `What, hast thou come to us with the truth, or art thou one ofthose that play?'
56.He said, `Nay, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth whooriginated them, and I am one of those that bear witness thereunto.
57.And, by God, I shall assuredly outwit your idols, after you have gone awayturning your backs.'
%327% 58.So he broke them into fragments, all but a great one they had, for haply theywould return to it.
59.They said, `Who has done this with our gods? Surely he is one ofthe evildoers.
60.They said, `We heard a young man making mention of them, and he was calledAbraham.'
61.They said, `Bring him before the people's eyes; haply they shall bearwitness.'
62.They said, `So, art thou the man who did this unto our gods, Abraham?'
63.He said `No; it was this great one of them that did it.Question them, ifthey are able to speak!'
64.So they returned one to another, any they said, `Surely it is you who arethe evildoers.'
65.Then they were utterly put to confusion saying, 'Very well indeed thouknowest these do not speak.'
66.He said, `What, and do you serve, apart from God, that which profits younothing, neither hurts you?67.Fie upon you and that you serve apart from God! Do you not understand ?'
68.They said, `Burn him, and help your gods, if you would do aught.'
69.We said, `O fire, be coolness and safety for Abraham!'
70.They desired to outwit him; so We made them the worse losers,
71.and We delivered him, and Lot, unto the land that We had blessedfor all beings.
72.And We gave him Isaac and Jacob in superfluity, and every onemade We righteous
%328% 73.and appointed them to be leaders guiding by Our command, and We revealedto them the doing of good deeds, and to perform the prayer, and to pay thealms, and Us they served.
74.And Lot--to him We gave judgment and knowledge; and we delivered himfrom the city that had been doing deeds of corruption; they Were an evilpeople, truly ungodly;
75.and We admitted him into Our mercy; he was of the righteous.
76.And Noah--when he called before, and we answered him, and delivered him andhis people from the great distress,
77.and We helped him against the people Who cried lies to Our signs; surelythey were an evil people, so We drowned them all together.
78.And David and Solomon--when they gave judgment concerning the tillage, whenthe sheep of the people strayed there, and We bore witness totheir judgment;
79.and We made Solomon to understand it, and unto each gave We judgment andknowledge.And with David We subjected the mountains to give glory, and thebirds, and We were doers.
80.And We taught him the fashioning of garments coats of mail for you, tofortify you against your violence; then are you thankful?
81.And to Solomon the wind, strongly blowing, that ran at his command unto theland that We had blessed; and we had knowledge of everything;
%329% 82.and of the Satans some dived for him and did other work besides; and We werewatching over them.
83.And Job--when he called unto his Lord, `Behold, affliction has visited me,and Thou art the most merciful of the merciful.'
84.So We answered him, and removed the affliction that was upon him, and We gavehis people, and the like of them with them, mercy from Us, and a Reminder tothose who serve.
85.And Ishmael, Idris, Dhul Kifl Ezekiel.--each was of thepatient,
86.and We admitted them into Our mercy; they were of the righteous.
87.And Dhul Nun Jonah.--when he went forth enraged and thought that We wouldhave no power over him; then he called out in the darkness, `There is no godbut Thou.Glory be to Thee! I have done evil.'
88.So We answered him, and delivered him out of grief; even so do We deliverthe believers.
89.And Zachariah--when he calledunto his Lord, `O my Lord, leave me notsolitary; though Thou art the best of inheritors.'
90.So We answered him, and bestowed on him John, and We set his wife right forhim; truly they vied with one another, hastening to good works, and calledupon Us out of yearning and awe; and they were humble to Us.
%330% 91.And she who guarded her virginity, so We breathed into her of Our spiritand appointed her and her son to be a sign unto all beings.
92.`Surely this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord;so serve Me.'
93.But they split up their affair between them; all shall return to Us.
94.And whosoever does deeds of righteousness, being a believer, nounthankfulness shall befall his endeavour; We Ourselves write it downfor him.
95.There is a ban upon any city that We have destroyed; they shallnot return
96.till, when Gog and Magog are unloosed, and they slide down out of everyslope,
97.and nigh has drawn the true promise, and behold, the eyes of the unbelieversstaring: `Alas for us! We were heedlessof this; nay, we were evildoers.'
98.`Surely you, and that you were serving apart from God, are fuel forGehenna Hell.; you shall go down to it.'
99.If those had been gods, they would never have gone down to it; yet every oneof them shall therein abide forever;
100.there shall be sighing for them therein, and naught theyshall hear.
101.But as for those unto whom already the reward most fair has gone forth fromUs, they shall be kept far from it
%331% 102.neither shall they hear any whisper of it, and they shall dwell forever inthat their souls desired;
103.the greatest terror shall not grieve them, and the angels shall receive them:`This is your they that you were promised.'
104.On the day when We shall roll up heaven as a scroll is rolled for thewritings; as We originated the first creation, so We shall bring it backagain--a promise binding on Us; so We shall do.
105.For We have written in the Psalms, after the Remembrance, `The earth shall bethe inheritance of My righteous servants.'
106.21:105.Surely in this is a Message delivered unto a people who serve.
107.We have not sent thee, save as a mercy unto all beings.
108.Say: `It is revealed unto me only that your God is One God; do you thensurrender?'
109.Then, if they should turn their backs, say: `I have proclaimed to you allequally, even though I know not whether near or far is that youare promised.'
110.Surely He knows what is spoken aloud and He knows what you hide.
111.21:110.I know not; haply it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time.
112.He said: `My Lord, judge Thou with truth! And our Lord, is the All-merciful;His succour is ever to be sought against that you describe.'
%332% <22,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O men, fear your Lord! Surely the earthquake of the Hour is a mighty thing;
2.on the day when you behold it, every suckling woman shall neglect the childshe has suckled, and every pregnant woman shall deposit her burden, and thoushalt see mankind drunk, yet they are not drunk, but God's chastisement isterrible.
3.And among men there is such a one that disputes concerning God withoutknowledge and follows every rebel Satan,
4.against whom it is written down that whosoever take him for a friend, him heleads astray, and he guides him to the chastisement of the burning.
5.O men, if you are in doubt as to the Uprising, surely We created you of dustthen of a sperm-drop, then of a blood clot, then of a lump of flesh, formedand unformed that We may make clear to you.And We establish in the wombswhat We will, till a stated term, then We deliver you as infants, then thatyou may come of age; and some of you die, and some of you are kept back untothe viles state of life, that after knowing somewhat, they may know nothing.And thou beholdest the earth blackened, then, when We send down water uponit, it quivers, and swells, and puts forth herbs of every joyouskind.
%333% 6.That is because God--He is the Truth, and brings the dead to life, and ispowerful over everything,
7.and because the Hour is coming, no doubt of it, and God shall raise upwhosoever is within the tombs.
8.And among men there is such a one that disputes concerning God withoutknowledge or guidance, or an illuminating Book,
9.turning his side to lead astray from God's way; for him is degradation inthis world, and on the Resurrection Day We shall let him taste thechastisement of the burning:
10.`That is for what thy hands have forwarded and for that God is never unjustunto His servants.'
11.And among men there is such a one as serves God upon the very edge--if good befalls him he is at rest in it, but if a trial befalls him he turnscompletely over; he loses this world and the world to come; that is indeedthe manifest loss.
12.He calls, apart from God, upon that which hurts him not, and which neitherprofits him anything; that is indeed the far error
13.He calls upon him who is likelier to hurt him, rather than to profit him--an evil protector indeed, he, an evil friend!
14.God shall surely admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardensunderneath which rivers flow; surely God does that He desires.
15.Whosoever thinks God will not help himin the present world and the world to come,let him stretch up a rope to heaven, then let him sever it, and beholdwhether his guile does away with what enrages him.
%334% 16.Even so We have sent it down as signs, clear signs, and for that God guideswhom He desires.
17.Surely they that believe, and those of Jewry, the Sabaeans, the Christians,the Magians and the idolaters--God shall distinguish between them on the Dayof Resurrection; assuredly God is witness over everything.
18.SUJDAH AYA @Hast thou not seen how to God bow all who are in the heavensand all who are in the earth, the sun and the moon, the start and themountains, the trees and the beasts, and many of mankind? And many meritthe chastisement; and whom God abases, there is none to honour him.God doeswhatsoever He will.
19.These are two disputants who have disputed concerning their Lord.As forthe unbelievers, for them garments of fire shall be cut, and there shall bepoured over their heads boiling water
20.whereby whatsoever is in their bellies and their skins shall bemelted;
21.for them await hooked iron rods;
22.as often as they desire in their anguish to come forth from it, they shall berestored into it, and: `Taste the chastisement of the burning!'
23.God shall surely admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardensunderneath which rivers flow; therein they shall be adorned with bracelets ofgold and with pearls, and their apparel there shall be of silk;
%335% 24.and they shall be guided unto goodly speech, and they shall be guided untothe path of the All-laudable.
25.Those who disbelieve, and bar from God's way and the Holy Mosque that We haveappointed equal unto men, alike him who cleaves to it and the tent-dweller,and whosoever purposes to violate it wrongfully, We shall let him tastea painful chastisement
26.And when We settled for Abraham the place of the House: `Thou shall notassociate with Me anything.And do thou purify My House for those that shallgo about it and those that stand, for those that bow andprostrate themselves;
27.and proclaim among men the Pilgrimage, and they shall come unto thee on footand upon every lean beast, they shall come from every deep ravine
28.that they may witness things profitable to them and mention God's Name ondays well-known over such beasts of the flocks as He has provided them: "Soeat thereof, and feed the wretched poor."
29.Let them then finish with their self-neglect and let them fulfil their vows,and go about the Ancient House.'
30.All that; and whosoever venerates the sacred things of God, it shall bebetter for him with his Lord.And permitted to you are the flocks, exceptthat which is recited to you.And eschew the abomination of idols, andeschew the speaking of falsehood,
%336% 31.being men pure of faith unto God, not associating with Him anything; forwhosoever associates with God anything, it is as though he has fallen fromheaven and the birds snatch him away, or the wind sweeps him headlong into aplace for away.
32.All that; and whosoever venerates God's waymarks, that is of the godlinessof the hearts.
33.There are things therein profitable to you unto a stated term; thereaftertheir lawful place of sacrifice is by the Ancient House.
34.We have appointed for every nation a holy rite, that they may mention God'sName over such beasts of the flocks as He has provided them.Your God is OneGod, so to Him surrender.And give thou good tidings unto the humble
35.who, when God is mentioned, their hearts quake, and such as endure patientlywhatever visits them, and who perform the prayer, and expend of what We haveprovided them.
36.And the beasts of sacrifice--We have appointed them for you as among God'swaymarks; therein is good for you.So mention God's Name over them, standingin ranks; then, when their flanks collapse, eat of them and feed the beggarand the suppliant.So We have subjected them to you; haply you will bethankful
37.The flesh of them shall not reach God, neither their blood, but godlinessfrom you shall reach Him.So He has subjected them to you, that you maymagnify God for that He has guided you.And give thou good tidings unto thegood-doers.
38.Assuredly God will defend those who believe; surely God loves not anyungrateful traitor.
%337% 39.Leave is given to those who fight because they were wronged--surely God isable to help them--
40.who were expelled from their habitations without right, except that they say`Our Lord is God.' Had God not driven back the people, some by the means ofothers, there had been destroyed cloisters and churches, oratories andmosques, wherein God's Name is much mentioned.Assuredly God will help himwho helps Him--surely God is All-strong, All-mighty--
41.who, if We establish them in the land, perform the prayer, and pay the alms,and bid to honour, and forbid dishonour; and unto God belongs the issueof all affairs.
42.If they cry lies to thee, so too before them the people of Noah cried lies,and Ad and Thamood,
43.and the people of Abraham, the people of Lot,
44.and the men of Midian; to Moses also they cried lies.And I respited theunbelievers, then I seized them; and how was My horror!
45.How many a city We have destroyed in its evildoing, and now it is fallen downupon its turrets! How many a ruined well, a tall palace!46.What, have they not journeyed in the land so that they have hearts tounderstand with or ears to hear with? It is not the eyes that are blind, butblind are the hearts within the breasts.
%338% 47.And they demand of thee to hasten the chastisement! God will not fail Hispromise; and surely a day with thy Lord is as a thousand years of yourcounting.
48.How many a city I have respited in its evildoing; then I seized it, and toMe was the homecoming.
49.Say: `O men, I am only for you a plain warner.'
50.Those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness--theirs shall be forgivenessand generous provision.
51.And those who strive against Our signs to void them--they shall be theinhabitants of Hell.
52.We sent not ever any Messenger or Prophet before thee, but that Satan castinto his fancy, when he was fancying; but God annuls what Satan casts, thenGod confirms His signs--surely God is All-knowing, All-wise--
53.that He may make what Satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts issickness, and those whose heartsare hard; and surely the evildoers are inwide schism;
54.and that they who have been given Knowledge may know that it is the truthfrom thy Lord and believe in it, and so their hearts be humble unto Him; andassuredly God ever guides those who believe to a straight path.
55.And the unbelievers will not cease to be in doubt of it, until the Hour comeson them suddenly, or there shall come upon them the chastisement ofa barren day.
%339% 56.The Kingdom upon that day shall belong to God, and He shall judge betweenthem.As for those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, they shall bein Gardens of Bliss.
57.But as for the unbelievers, who cried lies to Our signs, for them awaitsa humbling chastisement.
58.And those who emigrated in God's way and were slain, or died, God shallprovide them with a fair provision; and surely God is the best of providers.
59.He shall admit them by a gate that is well-pleasing to them; and surely Godis All-knowing, All-clement.
60.Al that; and whosoever chastises after the mannerthat he was chastised andthen again is oppressed, assuredly God will help him; surely God isAll-pardoning, All-forgiving.
61.That is because God makes the night to enter into the day and makes the dayto enter into the night; and that God is All-hearing, All-seeing.
62.That is because God--He is the Truth, and that they call upon apart fromHim--that is the false; and for that God is the All-high, the All-great.
63.Hast thou not seen how that God has sent down out of heaven water, and in themorning the earth becomes green? God is All-subtle, All-aware.
64.To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; surely God--He isthe All-sufficient, the All-laudable.
%340% 65.Hast thou not seen how that God has subjected to you all that is in the earthand the ships to run upon the sea at His commandment, and He holds backheaven lest it should fall upon the earth, save by His leave?Surely God is All-gentle to men, All-compassionate.
66.It is He who gave you life, then He shall make you dead, then He shall giveyou life.Surely man is ungrateful.
67.We have appointed for every nation a holy rite that they shall perform.Let them not therefore wrangle with thee upon the matter, and do thou summonunto thy Lord; surely thou art upon a straight guidance.
68.And if they should dispute with thee, do thou say, `God knows very wellwhat you are doing.
69.God shall judge between you on the Day of Resurrection touching that whereonyou were at variance.'
70.Didst thou not know that God knows all that is in heaven and earth? Surelythat is in a Book; surely that for God is an easy matter.
71.They serve, apart from God, that whereon He has sent down never authorityand that whereof they have no knowledge; and for the evildoers there shall beno helper.
72.And when Our signs are recited to them, clear signs, thou recognisest in thefaces of the unbelievers denial; wellnigh they rush upon those who recite tothem Our signs.Say: `Shall I tell you of something worse than that? TheFire--God has promised it to the unbelievers--an evilhomecoming!'
%341% 73.O men, a similitude is struck; so give you ear to it.Surely those upon whomyou call, apart from God, shall never create a fly, though they bandedtogether to do it; and if a fly should rob them of aught, they would neverrescue it from him.Feeble indeed alike are the seeker and the sought!
74.They measure not God with His true measure; surely God isAll-strong, All-mighty.
75.God chooses of the angels Messengers and of mankind; surely God isAll-hearing, All-seeing.
76.He knows whatsoever is before them and behind them, and unto God all mattersare returned.
77.SUJDAH AYA @O men, bow you down and prostrate yourselves, and serve yourLord, and do good; haply so you shall prosper;
78.and struggle for God as is His due, for He has chosen you, and has laid onyou no impediment in your religion, being the creed of your father Abraham;He named you Muslims aforetime and in this, that the Messenger might be awitness against you, and that you might be witnesses against mankind.So perform the prayer, and pay the aims, and hold you fast to God; He is yourProtector--an excellent protector, an excellent Helper.
%342% <23,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Prosperous are the believers
2.who in their prayers are humble
3.and from idle talk turn away
4.and at almsgiving are active
5.and guard their private parts
6.save from their wives and what their right hands own then being notblameworthy
7.but whosoever seeks after more than that, those are the transgressors
8.and who preserve their trusts and their covenant
9.and who observe their prayers.
10.Those are the inheritors
11.who shall inherit Paradise therein dwelling forever.
12.We created man of an extraction of clay,
13.then We set him, a drop, in a receptacle secure,
14.then We created of the drop a clot then We created of the clot a tissuethen We created of the tissue bones then We garmented the bones is flesh;thereafter We produced him as another creature.So blessed be God, thefairest of creators!
15.Then after that you shall surely die,
16.then on the Day of Resurrection you shall surely be raised up.
17.And We created above you seven ways, and We were not heedless of creation.
%343% 18.And We sent down out of heaven water in measure and lodged it in the earth;and We are able to take it away.
19.Then We produced for you therewith gardens of palms and vines wherein aremany fruits for you, and of them you eat,
20.and a tree issuing from the Mount of Sinai that bears oil and seasoningfor all to eat.
21.And surely in the cattle there is lesson for you; We give you to drink ofwhat is in their bellies, and many uses there are in them for you,and of them you eat;
22.and upon them, and on the ships, you are borne ride..
23.And We sent Noah to his people; and he said, "O my people, serve God!You have no god other than He.Will you not be godfearing?"
24.Said the Council of the unbelievers of his people, `This is naught buta mortal like yourselves, who desires to gain superiority over you.Andif God willed, He would have sent down angels.We never heard of this amongour fathers, the ancients.
25.He is naught but a man bedevilled; so wait on him for a time.'
26.He said, `O my Lord, help me, for that they cry me lies.'
27.Then We said to him, `Make thou the Ark under Our eyes and as We reveal,and then, when Our command comes and the Oven boils, insert in it two ofevery kind and thy family--except for him against whom the word already hasbeen spoken; and address Me not concerning those who have done evil; theyshall be drowned.
%344% 28.Then, when thou art seated in the Ark and those with thee, say, `Praisebelongs to God, who has delivered us from the people of the evildoers.''
29.And say, "O my Lord, do Thou harbour me in a blessed harbour, for Thou artthe best of harbourers enable me to disembark.."
30.Surely in that are signs, and surely We put to the test.
31.Thereafter, after them, We produced another generation,
32.and We sent amongst them a Messenger of themselves, saying, `Serve God! Youhave no god other than He.Will you not be godfearing?'
33.Said the Council of the unbelievers of his people, who cried lies to theencounter of the world to come, and to whom We had given ease in the presentlife, `This is naught but a mortal like yourselves, who eats of what you eatand drinks of what you drink.
34.If you obey a mortal like yourselves, then you will be losers.
35.what, does he promise you that when you are dead, and become dust and bones,you shall be brought forth?
36.Away, Away with that you are promised!
37.There is nothing but our present life; We die, and We live, and We shallnot be raised up.
38.He is naught but a man who has forged against God a lie, and We willnot believe him.'
39.He said, `O my Lord, help me, for that they cry me lies,'
40.He said, `In a little they will be remorseful.'
41.And the Cry seized them justly, and We made them as scum; so away with thepeople of the evildoers!
42.Thereafter, after them, We produced other generations;
%345% 43.no nation outstrips its term, nor do they put it back.
44.Then sent We our Messengers successively; whenever its Messenger came to anation they cried him lies, so We caused some of them to follow others, andWe made them as but tales; so away with a people who do not believe!
45.Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a manifestauthority
46.unto pharaoh and his Council; but they waxed proud, and they werea lofty people,
47.and they said, `What, shall we believe two mortals like ourselves, whosepeople are our servants?'
48.So they cried them lies, and they were among the destroyed.
49.And We gave Moses the Book, that haply they would be guided;
50.and We made Mary's son, and his mother, to be a sign, and gave them refugeupon a height, where was a hollow and a spring:
51.`O Messengers, eat of the good things and do righteousness; surely I knowthe things you do.
52.Surely this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord;so fear Me.'
53.But they split in their affair between them into sects, each party rejoicingin what is with them.
54.So leave thou them in their perplexity for a time.
55.What, do they think that We succour them with of wealth andchildren?
56.We vie in good works for them? Nay, but they are not aware.
57.Surely those who tremble in fear of their Lord
58.and those who believe in the signs of their Lord
59.and those who associate naught with their Lord
%346% 60.and those who give what they give, their hearts quaking that they arereturning to their Lord--
61.those vie in good works, outracing to them.
62.We charge not any soul save to its capacity, and with Us is a Book speakingtruth, and they shall not be wronged.
63.Nay, but their hearts are in perplexity as to this, and they have deedsbesides that they are doing.
64.Till, when We seize with the chastisement the ones of them that live at ease,behold, they groan.
65.`Groan not today; surely you shall not be helped from Us.
66.My signs were recited to you, but upon your heels you withdrew,
67.waxing proud against it, talking foolish talk by night.'
68.Have they not pondered the saying, or came there upon them that which camenot upon their fathers, the ancients?
69.Or did they not recognise their Messenger and so denied him?
70.Or do they say, `He is bedevilled'? Nay, he has brought them the truth, butmost of them are averse from the truth.
71.end 23:70.Had the truth followed their caprices, the heavens and the earth andwhosoever in them it had surely corrupted.Nay, we brought them theirRemembrance, but from their Remembrance they turned.
72.Or dost thou ask them for tribute? Yet the tribute of thy Lord is better,and He is the best of providers.
73.Assuredly thou art calling them to a straight path;
74.and surely they that believe not in the world to come are deviating from thepath.
%347% 75.Did we have mercy on them, and remove the affliction that is upon them,they would persist in their insolence wandering blindly.
76.We already seized them with the chastisement, yet they abased not themselvesto their Lord nor were they humble;
77.until, when We open against them a door of terrible chastisement, lo, theyare sore confounded at it.
78.It is He who produced for you hearing, and eyes, and hearts; little thanksyou show.
79.It is He who scattered you in the earth, and to Him you shall be mustered.
80.It is He who gives life, and makes to die, and to Him belongs the alternationof night and day; what, will you not understand?
81.Nay, but they said the like of what the ancients said.
82.They said, `What, when we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we beindeed raised up?
83.We and our fathers have been promised this before; this is naught but thefairy-tales of the ancients.'
84.Say: `Whose is the earth, and whoso is in it, if you have knowledge?'
85.They will say, `God's.' Say: `Will you not then remember?'
86.Say: `Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the mightyThrone?'
87.They will say, `God's.' Say: `Will you not then be godfearing?'
88.Say: `In whose hand is the dominion of everything, protecting and Himselfunprotected, if you have knowledge?'
89.They will say, `God's.' Say: `How then are you bewitched?'
%348% 90.Nay, but We brought them the truth, and they are truly liars.
91.God has not taken to Himself any son, nor is there any god with Him; for theneach god would have taken off that he created and some of them would haverisen up over others; glory to be God, beyond that they describe,
92.who has knowledge of the Unseen and the Visible; high exalted be He, abovethat they associate!
93.Say: `O my Lord, if Thou shouldst show me that they are promised,
94.O my Lord, put me not among the people of the evildoers.'
95.Assuredly, We are able to show thee that We promise them.
96.Repel thou the evil with that which is fairer.We Ourselves know very wellthat they describe.
97.And say: `O my Lord, I take refuge in Thee from the evil suggestionsof the Satans,
98.and I take refuge in Thee, O my Lord lest they attend me.'
99.Till, when death comes to one of them, he says, `My Lord, return me;
100.haply I shall do righteousness in that I forsook.' Nay, it is but a wordhe speaks; and there, behind them, is a barrier until the day that theyshall be raised up.
101.For when the Trumpet is blown, that day there shall be no kinshipany more between them, neither will they question one another.
102.Then he whose scales are heavy--they are the prosperers,
103.and he whose scales are light--they have lost their soulsin Gehenna Hell dwelling forever,
104.the Fire smiting their faces and their lips displaced the while they glowerthere.
%349% 105.`What, were My signs not recited to you, and you cried themlies?
106.They shall say, `Our Lord, our adversity prevailed over us; we were anerring people.
107.Our Lord, bring us forth out of it! Then, if we revert, we shall beevildoers indeed.
108.`Slink you into it,' He shall say, `and do not speak to Me.
109.There is a party of My servants who said, "Our Lord, we believe; thereforeforgive us, and have mercy on us, for Thou art the best of the merciful."
110.But you took them for a laughing-stock, till they made you forget Myremembrance, mocking at them.
111.Now today I have recompensed them for their patient endurance; they are thetriumphant.'
112.He shall say, `How long have you tarried in the earth, by number of years?'
113.They shall say, `We have tarried a day, or part of a day; ask the numberers!
114.He shall say, `you have tarried but a little, did you know.
115.What, did you think that We created you only for sport,and that you would not be returned to Us?'
116.Then high exalted be God, the King, the True! There is no God but He, theLord of the noble Throne.
117.And whosoever calls upon another God with God, whereof he has no proof,his reckoning is with his Lord; surely the unbelievers shall not prosper.
118.And say: `My Lord, forgive and have mercy, for Thou art the bestof the merciful.'
%350% <24,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.A sura that We sent down and appointed; and We have sent down in it signs,clear signs, that haply you will remember.
2.The fornicatress and the fornicator--scourge each one of them a hundredstripes, andin the matter of God's religion let no tenderness for them seizeyou if you believe in God and the Last Day; and let a party of the believerswitness their chastisement.
3.The fornicator shall marry none but a fornicatress or an idolatress, and thefornicatress--none shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolator; that isforbidden to the believers.
4.And those who cast it up on accuse women in wedlock, and then bring notfour witnesses, scourge them with eighty stripes, and do not accept anytestimony of theirs ever; those--they are the ungodly.
5.save such as repent thereafter and make amends; surely God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
6.And those who cast it up on accuse their wives having no witnesses exceptthemselves, the testimony of one of them shall be to testify by God fourtimes that he is of the truthful,
7.and a fifth time, that the curse of God shall be upon him, if he shouldbe of the liars,
8.It shall avert from her the chastisement if she testify by God four timesthat he is of the liars,
9.and a fifth time, that the wrath of God shall be upon her, if he shouldbe of the truthful.
10.But for God's bounty to you and His mercy and that God turns, and isAll-wise--
%341% 11.Those who came with the slander are a band of you; do not reckon it evilfor you; rather it is good for you.Every man of them shall have the sinthat he has earned charged to him; and whosoever of them took upon himselfthe greater part of it, him there awaits a mighty chastisement.
12.Why, when you heard it, did the believing men and women not of their ownaccount think good thoughts, and say, `This is a manifest calumny'
13.Why did they not bring four witnesses against it?  But since they did notbring the witnesses, in God's sight they are the liars.
14.But for God's bounty to you and His mercy in the present world and the worldto come there would have visited you for your mutterings a mightychastisement.
15.When you received it on your tongues, and were speaking with your mouthsthat whereof you had no knowledge, and reckoned it alight thing, and withGod it was a mighty thing--
16.And why, when you heard it, did you not say, `It is not for us to speak aboutthis, glory be to Thee! This is a mighty calumny'?
17.God admonishes you, that you shall never repeat the like of it again, ifyou are believers.
18.God makes clear to you the signs; and God is All-knowing, All-wise.
19.Those who love that indecency should be spread abroad concerning them thatbelieve--there awaits them a painful chastisement in the present world andthe world to come; and God knows, and you know not.
20.But for God's bounty to you and His mercy and that God is All-gentle,All-compassionate--
%352% 21.O believers, follow not the steps of Satan; for whosoever follows the stepsof Satan, assuredly he bids to indecency and dishonour.But for God's bountyto you and His mercy not one of you would have been pure ever; but Godpurifies whom He will; and God is All-hearing, All-knowing.
22.Let not those of you who possess bounty and plenty swear off giving kinsmenand the way of God; but let them pardonand forgive.Do you not wish that Godshould forgive you? God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
23.Surely those who cast it up on accuse women in wedlock that are heedlessindescreet but believing shall be accursed in the present world and theworld to come; and there awaits them a mighty chastisement
24.on the day when their tongues, their hands and their feet shall testifyagainst them touching that they were doing.
25.Upon that day God will pay them in full their just due, and they shall knowthat God is the manifest Truth.
26.Corrupt women for corrupt men, and corrupt men for corrupt women; good womenfor good men, and good men for good women--these are declared quit of whatthey say; theirs shall be forgiveness and generous provision.
27.O believers, do not enter houses other than your houses until you firstask leave and salute the people thereof; that is better for you; haplyyou will remember.
%353% 28.And if you find not anyone therein, enter it not until leave is givento you.And if you are told, `Return,' return; that is purer for you; andGod knows the things you do.
29.There is no fault in you that you enter houses uninhabited wherein enjoymentis for you.God knows what you reveal and what you hide.
30.Say to the believers, that they cast down their eyes and guard their privateparts; that is purer for them.God is aware of the things theywork.
31.And say to the believing women, that they cast down their eyes and guardtheir private parts, and reveal not their adornment save such as is outward;and let them cast their veils over their bosoms, and not reveal theiradornment save to their husbands, or their fathers, or their husbands'fathers, or their sons, or their husbands' sons, or their brothers, or theirbrother's sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or what their righthands own, or such men as attend them, not having sexual desire, or childrenwho have not yet attained knowledge of women's private parts; nor let themstamp their feet, so that their hidden ornament may be known.And turn alltogether to God, O you believers; haply so you will prosper.
%354% 32.Marry the spouseless among you, and your slaves and handmaidens that arerighteous; if they are poor, God will enrich them of His bounty; God isAll-embracing, All-knowing.
33.And let those who find not the means to marry be abstinent till God enrichesthem of His bounty.Those your right hands own who seek emancipation,contract with them accordingly, if you know some good in them; and give themof the wealth of God that He has given you.And constrain not yourslavegirls to prostitution, if they desire to live in chastity, that you mayseek the chance goods of the present life.Whosoever constrains them, surelyGod, after their being constrained, is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
34.Now We have sent down to you signs making all clear, and an exampleof those who passed away before you, and an admonition for the godfearing.
35.God is the Light of the heavens and the earth; the likeness of His Light isas a niche wherein is a lamp the lamp in a glass, the glass as it were aglittering star kindled from a Blessed Tree, an olive that is neither of theEast nor of the West whose oil wellnigh would shine, even if no fire touchedit; Light upon Light; God guides to His Light whom He will.And God strikessimilitudes for men, and God has knowledge of everything.
36.in temples God has allowed to be raised up, and His Name to be commemoratedtherein; therein glorifying Him, in the mornings and the evenings,
%355% 37.are men whom neither commerce nor trafficking diverts from the remembrance ofGod and to perform the prayer, and to pay the alms, fearing a day when heartsand eyes shall be turned about,
38.that God may recompense them for their fairest works and give them increaseof His bounty; and God provides whomsoever He will, without reckoning.
39.And as for the unbelievers, their works are as a mirage in a spacious plainwhich the man athirst supposes to be water, till, when he comes to it, hefinds it is nothing; there indeed he finds God, and He pays him his accountif full; and God is swift at the reckoning.
40.or they are as shadows upon a sea obscure covered by a billow above which isa billow above which are clouds, shadows piled one upon another; when he putsforth his hand, wellnigh he cannot see it.And to whomsoever God assigns nolight, no light has he.
41.Hast thou not seen how that whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earthextols God, and the birds spreading their wings? Each--He knows its prayerand its extolling; and God knows the things they do.
42.To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Him is thehomecoming.
43.Hast thou not seen how God drives the clouds, then composes them, thenconverts them into a mass, then thou seest the rain issuing out of the midstof them? And He sends down out of heaven mountains, wherein is hail, so thatHe smites whom He with it, and turns it aside from whom He will; wellnigh thegleam of His lightning snatches away the sight.
%356% 44.God turns about the day and the night; surely in that is a lesson for thosewho have eyes.
45.God has created every beast of water, and some of them go upon their bellies,and some of them go upon two feet, and some of them go upon four; Godcreates whatever He will; God is powerful over everything.
46.Now We have sent down signs making all clear; God guides whomsoever He willto a straight path.
47.They say, `We believe in God and the Messenger, and we obey.' Then afterthat a party of them turn away; those--they are not believers.
48.when they are called to God and His Messenger that he may judge between them,lo, a party of them are swerving aside;
49.but if they are in the right, they will come to him submissively.
50.What, is there sickness in their hearts, or are they in doubt, or do theyfear that God may be unjust towards them and His Messenger? Nay, but those--they are the evildoers.
51.All that the believers say, when they are called to God and His Messenger,that he may judge between them, is that they say, `We hear, and we obey';those--they are the prosperers.
52.Whoso obeys God and His Messenger, and fears God and has awe of Him, those--they are the triumphant.
53.They have sworn by God the most earnest oaths, if thou commandest them theywill go forth.Say: `Do not swear; honourable obedience is sufficient.Surely God is aware of the things you do.'
%357% 54.Say: `Obey God, and obey the Messenger; then, if you turn away, only upon himrests what is laid on him, and upon you rests what is laid on you.If youobey him, you will be guided.It is only for the messenger to deliver themanifest Message.'
55.God has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds that He willsurely make you successors in the land, even as He made those who were beforethem successors, and that He will surely establish their religion for themthat He has approved for them, and will give them in exchange, after theirfear, security: `They shall serve Me, not associating with Me anything.'Whoso disbelieves after that, those--they are the ungodly.
56.Perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and obey the Messenger--haply so youwill find mercy.
57.Think not the unbelievers able to frustrate God in the earth; their refuge isthe Fire--an evil homecoming.
58.O believers, let those your right hands own and those of you who have notreached puberty ask leave of you three times--before the prayer of dawn, andwhen you put off your garments at the noon for the noonday heat., and afterthe evening prayer--three times of nakedness undress for you.There is nofault in you or them, apart from these, that you go about tending one tothe other.So God makes clear to you the signs; and God is All-knowing,All-wise.
%358% 59.When your children reach puberty, let them ask leave, as those before themasked leave.So God makes clear to you His signs; and God is All-knowing,All-wise.
60.Such women as are past child-bearing and have no hope of marriage--there isno fault in them that they put off their outer clothes, so be it that theyflaunt no ornament; but to abstain is better for them; and God isAll-hearing, All-knowing.
61.There is no fault in the blind, and there is no fault in the lame, and thereis no fault in the sick, neither in yourselves, that you eat of your houses,or your fathers' houses, or your mothers' houses, or your brothers' houses,or your sisters' houses, or the houses of your uncles or your aunts paternal,or the houses of your uncles or your aunts maternal, or that whereof you ownthe keys, or of your friend; there is no fault in you that you eat alltogether, or in groups separately.But when you enter houses, greet oneanother with a greeting from God, blessed and good.So God make clear to youthe signs; haply you will understand.
%359% 62.Those only are believers, who believein God and His Messenger and who, when they are with him upon a commonmatter, go not away until they ask his leave.Surely those who ask thyleave--those are they that believe in God and His Messenger; so, when theyask thy leave for some affair of their own, give leave to whom thou wilt ofthem, and ask God's forgiveness for them; surely God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
63.Make not the calling of the Messenger among yourselves like your callingone of another.God knows those of you who slip away surreptitiously; so letthose who go against His command beware, lest a trial befall them, or therebefall them a painful chastisement.
64.Why, surely to God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth; Heever knows what state you are upon; and the day when they shall be returnedto Him, then He will tell them of what they did; and God knows everything.
<25,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Blessed be He who has sent down the Salvation upon His servant, that he maybe a warner to all beings;
2.to whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and He has nottaken to Him a son, and He has no associate in the Kingdom; and He createdevery thing, then He ordained it very exactly.
%360% 3.Yet they have taken to them gods, apart from Him, that create nothing andthemselves are created, andhave no power to hurt or profit themselves, nopower of death or life or raising up.
4.The unbelievers say, `This is naught but a calumny he has forged, and otherfolk have helped him to it.' So they have committed wrong and falsehood.
5.They say, `Fairy-tales of the ancients that he has had written down, so thatthey are recited to him at the dawn and in the evening.'
6.Say: `He sent it down, who knows the secret in the heavens and earth; He isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate'.
7.They also say, `What ails this Messenger that he eats food, and goes in themarkets? Why has an angel not been sent down to him, to be a warnerwith him?
8.Or why is not a treasure thrown to him, or why has he not a Garden to eatof?' The evildoers say, `You are only following a man bewitched!'
9.Behold, how they strike similitudes for thee, and go astray, and are unableto find a way!
10.Blessed be He who, if He will, shall assign to thee better than that--gardensunderneath which rivers flow, and he shall assign to theepalaces.
11.Nay, but they cry lies to the Hour; and We have prepared for him who crieslies to the Hour a Blaze.
%361% 12.When it sees them from a far place, they shall hear its bubbling andsighing.
13.And when they are cast, coupled in fetters, into a narrow place of that Fire,they will call out there for destruction.
14.`Call not out today for one destruction, but call for many!'
15.Say: `Is that better, or the Garden of Eternity, that is promised to thegodfearing, and is their recompense and homecoming?'
16.Therein they shall have what they will dwelling forever; it is a promisebinding upon thy Lord, and of Him to be required.
17.Upon the day when He shall muster them and that they serve, apart from God,and He shall say, `Was it you that led these My servants astray, or did theythemselves err from the way?'
18.They shall say, `Glory be to Thee! It did not behove us take unto ourselvesprotectors apart from Thee; but Thou gavest them and their fathers enjoymentof days, until they forgot the Remembrance, and were a peoplecorrupt.'
19.So they cried you lies touching the things you say, and you can neither turnit aside, nor find any help.Whosoever of you does evil, We shall let himtaste a great chastisement.
20.And we sent not before thee any Envoys, but that they ate food, and wentin the markets; and We appointed some of you to be a trial for others:`Will you endure?' Thy Lord is ever All-seeing.
%362% 21.Say those who look not to encounter Us, `Why have the angels not been sentdown on us, or why see we not our Lord?' Waxed proud they have within them,and become greatly disdainful.
22.Upon the day that they see the angels, no good tidings that day for thesinners; they shall say, `A ban forbidden!'
23.We shall advance upon what work they have done, and make it a scattereddust.
24.The inhabitants of Paradise that day, better shall be their lodging, fairertheir resting-place.
25.Upon the day that heaven is split asunder with the clouds and the angels aresent down in majesty,
26.the Kingdom that day, the true Kingdom, shall belong to the All-merciful,and it shall be a day harsh for the unbelievers.
27.Upon the day the evildoer shall bite his hands, saying, `Would that I hadtaken a way along with the Messenger!
28.Alas, would that I had not taken so-and-so for a friend!
29.He indeed led me astray from the Remembrance, after it had come to me; Satanis ever a forsaker of men.'
30.The Messenger says, `O my Lord, behold, my people have taken this Koran as athing to be shunned.'
31.Even so We have appointed to every prophet an enemy among the sinners;but thy Lord suffices as a guide and as a helper.
32.The unbelievers say, `Why has the Koran not been sent down upon him all atonce?' Even so, that We may strengthen thy heart thereby, and We have chantedit very distinctly.
%363% 33.They bring not to thee any similitude but that We bring thee the truth, andbetter in exposition.
34.Those who shall be mustered to Gehenna Hell upon their faces--they shall beworse in place, and gone further astray from the way.
35.We gave Moses the Book, and appointed with him his brother Aaron asminister
36.and We said, `Go to the people who have cried lies to Our signs'; then Wedestroyed them utterly.
37.And the people of Noah, when they cried lies to the Messengers, We drownedthem, and made them to be a sign to mankind; and We have prepared for theevildoers a painful chastisement.
38.And Ad, and Thamood, and the men of Er-Rass, and between that generations amany--for each
39.We struck similitudes, and each We ruined utterly.
40.Surely they have come by the city that was rained on by an evil rain; what,have they not seen it? Nay, but they look for no upraising.
41.And when they see thee, they take thee in mockery only: `What, is this hewhom God sent forth as a Messenger?
42.Wellnigh he had led us astray from our gods, but that we kept steadfast tothem.' Assuredly they shall know, when they see the chastisement, who isfurther astray from the Way.
43.Hast thou seen him who has taken his caprice to be his god? Wilt thou be aguardian over them?
%364% 44.Or deemest thou that most of them hear or understand? They are but as thecattle; nay, they are further astray from the way.
45.Hast thou not regarded thy Lord, how He has stretched out the shadow?  HadHe willed, He would have made it still.Then We appointed the sun, to be aguide to it;
46.thereafter We seize it to Ourselves, drawing it gently.
47.It is He who appointed the night for you to be a garment and sleep for arest, and day He appointed for a rising.
48.And it is He who has loosed the winds, bearing good tidings before His mercy;and We sent down from heaven pure water
49.so that We might revive a dead land, and give to drink of it, of that Wecreated, cattle and men a many.
50.We have indeed turned it about amongst them, so that they may remember; yetmost men refuse all but unbelief.
51.If We had willed, We would have raised up in every city a warner.
52.So obey not the unbelievers, but struggle with them thereby mightily.
53.And it is He who let forth the two seas, this one sweet, grateful to taste,and this salt, bitter to the tongue, and He set between them a barrier, and aban forbidden.
54.And it is He who created of water a mortal, and made him kindred of blood andmarriage; thy Lord is All-powerful.
55.And they serve, apart from God, what neither profits them nor hurts them; andthe unbeliever is ever a partisan against his Lord.
%365% 56.We have sent thee not, except good tidings to bear, and warning.
57.Say: `I do not ask of you a wage for this, except for him who wishes to taketo his Lord a way.'
58.Put thy trust in the Living God, the Undying, and proclaim His praise.Sufficiently is He aware of His servants' sins
59.who created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is, in six days,then sat Himself upon the Throne, the All-compassionate: ask any informed ofHim!
60.SUJDAH AYA @But when they are told, `Bow yourselves to the All-merciful,'they say, `And what is the All-merciful? Shall we bow ourselves to what thoubiddest?' And it increases them in aversion.
61.Blessed be He who has set in heaven constellations, and has set among them alamp, and an illuminating moon.
62.And it is He who made the night and day a succession for whom He desires toremember or He desires to be thankful.
63.The servants of the All-merciful are those who walk in the earth modestlyand who, when the ignorant address them, say, `Peace';
64.who pass the night prostrate to their Lord and standing;
65.who say, `Our Lord, turn Thou from us the chastisement of Gehenna Hell.;surely its chastisement is torment most terrible;
66.evil it is as a lodging-place and an abode';
67.who, when they expend, are neither prodigal nor parsimonious, but betweenthat is a just stand;
%366% 68.who call not upon another god with God, nor slay the soul God has forbiddenexcept by right, neither fornicate, for whosoever does that shall meetthe price of sin--
69.doubled shall be the chastisement for him on the Resurrection Day, and heshall dwell therein humbled,
70.save him who repents, and believes, and does righteous work--those, God willchange their evil deeds into good deeds, for God is ever All-forgiving,All-compassionate;
71.and whosoever repents, and does righteousness, he truly turns to Godin repentance.
72.And those who bear not false witness and, when they pass by idle talk, passby with dignity;
73.who, when they are reminded of the signs of their Lord, fall not down thereatdeaf and blind;
74.who say, `Our Lord, give us refreshment of our wives and seed, and make us amodel to the godfearing.'
75.Those shall be recompensed with the highest heaven, for that they enduredpatiently, and they shall receive therein a greeting and--`Peace!'
76.Therein they shall dwell forever; fair it is as a lodging-place andan abode.
77.Say: `My Lord esteems you not at all were it not for your prayer, for youhave cried lies, and it shall surely be fastened.'
%367% <26,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ta Sin Mim
2.Those are the signs of the Manifest Book.
3.Perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers.
4.If We will, We shallsend down on them out of heaven a sign, so their neckswill stay humbled to it.
5.But never fresh remembrance comes to them from the All-merciful, exceptthey turn away from it.
6.So they have cried lies; therefore assuredly tidings will come to themof that they mocked at.
7.What, have they not regarded the earth, how many therein We have caused togrow of every generous kind?
8.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
9.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
10.And when thy Lord called to Moses, `Go to the people of theevildoers,
11.the people of Pharaoh; will they not be godfearing?'
12.He said, `My Lord, I fear they will cry me lies,
13.and my breast will be straitened, and my tongue will not be loosed; so sendto Aaron.
14.They also have a sin against me, and I fear they will slay me.'
15.Said He, `No indeed; but go, both of you, with Out signs, and We assuredlyshall be with you, listening.
16.So go you to Pharaoh, and say, "Verily, I am the Messenger of the Lord of allBeing;
17.so send forth with us the children of Israel."
18.He Pharaoh said, `Did we not raise thee amongst us as a child? Didst thounot tarry among us years of thy life?
19.And thou didst the deed thou didst, being one of the ungrateful!'
%368% 20.Said he, `Indeed I did it then, being one those that stray;
21.so I fled from you, fearing you.But my Lord gave me Judgment and made meone of the Envoys.
22.That is a blessing thou reproachest me with, having enslaved the Children ofIsrael.'
23.Pharaoh said, `And what is the Lord of all Being?'
24.He said, `The Lord of the heavens and earth, and what between them is, if youhave faith.'
25.Said he Pharaoh to those about him, `Do you not hear?'
26.He said, `Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients.'
27.Said he, `Surely your Messenger who was sent to you is possessed!'
28.He said, `The Lord of the East and West, and what between them is, if youhave understanding,'
29.Said he, `If thou takest a god other than me, I shall surely make thee one ofthe imprisoned.
30.He said, `What, even though I brought thee something manifest?'
31.Said he, `Bring it then, if thou art of the truthful.'
32.So he cast his staff, and behold, it was a serpent manifest.
33.And he drew forth his hand, and lo, it was white to the beholders.
34.Said he to the Council about him, `Surely this man is a cunning sorcerer
35.who desires to expel you from your land by his sorcery; what do youcommand?'
36.They said, `Put him and his brother off a while, and send among the citiesmusterers,
37.to bring thee every cunning sorcerer.'
38.So the sorcerers were assembled for the appointed time of a fixed day.
39.The people were asked, `Will you assemble?
%369% 40.Haply we shall follow the sorcerers if it should be they are thevictors.'
41.Then, when the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, `Shall we indeed have awage, if we should be the victors?'
42.He said, `Yes indeed; and you shall then be among the near-stationed.'
43.Moses said to them, `Cast you down what you will cast.'
44.So theycast their ropes and their staffs, and said, `By the might of Pharaohwe shall be the victors.'
45.Then Moses cast his staff and lo, it forthwith swallowed up their lyinginvention;
46.so the sorcerers were cast down, bowing themselves.
47.They said, `We believe in the Lord of all Being,
48.the Lord of Moses and Aaron.'
49.Said Pharaoh, `You have believed him before I gave you leave.Why, he is thechief of you, the same that taught you sorcery; now you shall know! I shallassuredly cut off alternately your hands and feet, then I shall crucify youall together.'
50.They said, `There is no harm; surely unto our Lord we areturning.
51.We are eager that our Lord should forgive us our offences, for thatwe are the first of the believers.'
52.Also We revealed unto Moses, `Go with My servants by night; surelyyou will be followed.'
53.Then Pharaoh sent among the cities musterers:
54.`Behold, these are a small troop,
55.and indeed they are enraging against us;
56.and we are a host on our guard.'
57.So We expelled them from gardens and fountains,
58.and treasures and a noble station;
59.even so, and We bequeathed them upon the Children of Israel.
60.Then they followed them at the sunrise;
%370% 61.and when the two hosts sighted each other, the companionsof Moses said, `We are overtaken!'
62.Said he, `No indeed; surely my Lord is with me; He will guide me.'
63.Then We revealed to Moses, `Strike with thy staff the sea'; and it clave,and each part was as a mighty mount.
64.And there We brought the others on,
65.and We delivered Moses and those with him all together;
66.then We drowned the others.
67.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
68.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
69.And recite to them the tiding of Abraham
70.when he said to his father and his people, `What do you serve?'
71.They said, `We serve idols, and continue cleaving to them.'
72.He said, `Do they hear you when you call,
73.or do they profit you, or harm?'
74.They said, `Nay, but we found our fathers so doing.'
75.He said, `And have you considered what you have been serving,
76.you and your fathers, the elders?
77.They are an enemy to me, except the Lord of all Being
78.who created me, and Himself guides me,
79.and Himself gives me to eat and drink,
80.and, whenever I am sick, heals me,
81.who makes me to die, then gives me life,
82.and who I am eager shall forgive me my offence on the Day of Doom.
83.My Lord, give me judgment, and join me with the righteous,
%371% 84.and appoint me a tongue of truthfulness among the others.
85.Make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss.
86.and forgive my father, for he is one of those astray.
87.Degrade me not upon the day when they are raised up,
88.the day when neither wealth nor sons shall profit
89.except for him who comes to God with a pure heart.
90.And Paradise shall be brought forward for the godfearing,
91.and Hell advanced for the perverse.
92.It shall be said to them, `Where is that you were serving
93.apart from God? Do they help you or help themselves?'
94.Then they shall be pitched into it, they and the perverse
95.and the hosts of Iblis, all together.
96.They shall say, as they dispute there one with another,
97.`By God, we were certainly in manifest error
98.when we made you equal with the Lord of all Being.
99.It was naught but the sinners that led us astray;
100.so now we have no intercessors,
101.no loyal friend.
102.O that we might return again, and be among the believers!'
103.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
104.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
105.The people of Noah cried lies to the Envoys
106.when their brother Noah said to them, `Will you not be godfearing?
107.I am for you a faithful Messenger,
108.so serve you God, and obey you me.
109.I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of allBeing;
110.so fear you God, obey you me.'
111.They said, `Shall we believe thee, whom the vilest follow?'
%372% 112.He said, `What knowledge have I of that they have been doing?
113.Their account falls only upon my Lord, were you but aware.
114.I would not drive away the believers;
115.I am naught but a plain warner.'
116.They said, `If thou givest not over, Noah, thou shalt assuredly beone of the stoned.'
117.He said, `My Lord, my people have cried me lies,
118.so give true deliverance between me and them, and deliver me and thebelievers that are with me.'
119.So We delivered him, and those with him, in the laden ship,
120.then afterwards We drowned the rest.
121.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
122.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
123.Ad cried lies to the Envoys
124.when their brother Hood said to them, `Will you not be godfearing?
125.I am for you a faithful Messenger,
126.so fear you God, and obey you me.
127.I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of allBeing.
128.What, do you build on every prominence a sign, sporting,
129.and do you take to you castles, haply to dwell forever?
130.When you assault, you assault like tyrants!
131.So fear you God, and obey you me;
132.and fear Him who has succoured you with what you know,
133.succoured you with flocks and sons,
134.gardens and fountains.
135.Indeed, I fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day.'
136.They said, `Alike it is to us, whether thou admonishest, or art not one ofthe admonishers;
%373% 137.this is nothing but the habit of the ancients,
138.and we shall not be chastised.'
139.So they cried him lies; then We destroyed them.Surely in that is a sign,yet most of them are not believers.
140.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
141.Thamood cried lies to the Envoys
142.when their brother Salih said to them, `Will you not be godfearing?
143.I am for you a faithful Messenger,
144.so fear you God, and obey you me.
145.I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord ofall Being.
146.Will you be left secure in this here, among
147.gardens and fountains,
148.sown fields, and palms with slender spathes?
149.Will you still skilfully hew houses out of the mountains?
150.So fear you God, and obey you me,
151.and obey not the commandment of the prodigal
152.who do corruption in the earth, and set not things aright.'
153.They said, `Thou art merely one of those that are bewitched;
154.thou art naught but a mortal, like us; then produce a sign, if thou artone of the truthful.'
155.He said, `This is a she-camel; to her a draught and to you a draught, ona day appointed,
156.and do not touch her with malice so that there seize you the chastisement ofa dreadful day.'
157.But they hamstrung her, and in the morning they were remorseful,and the chastisement seized them.
158.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
159.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
%374% 160.The people of Lot cried lies to the Envoys
161.when their brother Lot said to them, `Will you not be godfearing?
162.I am for you a faithful Messenger,
163.so fear you God, and obey you me.
164.I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of allBeing.
165.What, do you come to male beings,
166.leaving your wives that your Lord created for you? Nay, but you are a peopleof transgressors.'
167.They said, `If thou givest not over, Lot, thou shalt assuredly beone of the expelled.'
168.He said, `Truly I am a detester of what you do.
169.My Lord, deliver me and my people from that they do.'
170.So We delivered him and his people all together,
171.save an old woman among those that tarried;
172.then We destroyed the others,
173.and We rained on them a rain; and evil is the rain of them that are warned.
174.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
175.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
176.The men of the Thicket cried lies to the Envoys
177.when Shuaib said to them, `Will you not be godfearing?
178.I am for you a faithful Messenger,
179.so fear you God, and obey you me.
180.I ask of you wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of allBeing.
181.Fill up the measure, and be not cheaters,
182.and weigh with the straight balance,
183.and diminish not the goods of the people, and do not mischief in the earth,working corruption.
%375% 184.Fear Him who created you, and the generations of the ancients.'
185.They said, `Thou art merely one of those that are bewitched;
186.thou art naught but a mortal, like us; indeed, we think that thou artone of the liars.
187.Then drop down on us lumps piece of sky from heaven, if thou art oneof the truthful.'
188.He said, `My Lord knows very well what you are doing.'
189.But they cried him lies; then there seized themthe chastisement of the Day of Shadow; assuredly it was the chastisement ofa dreadful day.
190.Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
191.Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
192.Truly it is the revelation of the Lord of all Being,
193.brought down by the Faithful Spirit
194.upon thy heart, that thou mayest be one of the warners,
195.in a clear, Arabic tongue.
196.Truly it is in the scriptures of the ancients.
197.Was it not a sign for them, that it is knownto the learned of the Children of Israel?
198.If We had sent it down on a barbarian
199.and he had recited it to them, they would not have believed in it.
200.Even so We have caused it to enter into the hearts of thesinners,
201.who will not believe in it, until they see the painful chastisement
202.so that it will come upon them suddenly, while they are not aware,
203.and they will say, `Shall we be respited?'
204.What, do they seek to hasten Our chastisement?
205.What thinkest thou? If We give them enjoyment of days for manyyears,
206.then there comes on them that they were promised,
%376% 207.what will it then avail them, the enjoyment of days they were given?
208.Never a city We destroyed, but it had warners
209.for a reminder; and never did We wrong.
210.Not by the Satans has it been brought down;
211.it behoves them not, neither are they able.
212.Truly, they are expelled from hearing.
213.So call thou not uponanother god with God, lest thou shouldst be one ofthose that are chastised.
214.And warn thy clan, thy nearest kin.
215.Lower thy wing to those who follow thee, being believers;
216.then, if they disobey thee, say, `I am quit of that you do.'
217.Put thy trust in the All-mighty, the All-compassionate
218.who sees thee when thou standest
219.and when thou turnest about among those who bow.
220.Surely He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
221.Shall I tell you on whom the Satans come down?
222.They come down on every guilty impostor.
223.They give ear, but most of them are liars.
224.And the poets--the perverse follow them;
225.hast thou not seen how they wander in every valley
226.and how they say that which they do not?
227.Save those that believe, and do righteous deeds, and remember God oft, andhelp themselves after being wronged; and those who do wrong shall surely knowby what overturning they will be overturned.
%377% <27,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ta SinThose are the signs of the Koran and a Manifest Book,
2.a guidance, and good tidings unto the believers
3.who perform the prayer, and pay the alms,and have sure faith in the Hereafter.
4.Those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have decked out fair for themtheir works, and they wander blindly;
5.those are they whom an evil chastisement awaits, and they will be thegreatest losers in the Hereafter.
6.Thou receivest the Koran from One All-wise, All-knowing.
7.When Moses said to his people `I observe a fire, and will bring you news ofit, or I will bring you a flaming brand, that haply you shallwarm yourselves.'
8.So, when he came to it, he was called: `Blessed is He who is in fire, and hewho is about it.Glory be to God, the Lord of all Being!
9.Moses, behold, it is I, God, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
10.Cast down thy staff.' And when he saw it quivering like a serpent he turnedabout, retreating, and turned not back.`Moses, fear not; surely the Envoysdo not fear in My presence,
11.save him who has done evil, then, after evil, has changed into good;All-forgiving am I, All-compassionate.
12.Thrust thy hand in thy bosom and it will come forth white without evil--amongnine signs to Pharaoh and his people; they are an ungodly people.'
13.But when Our signs came to them visibly, they said, `Thisis a manifest sorcery';
%378% 14.and they denied them, though their souls acknowledged them, wrongfully andout of pride.Behold, how was the end of the workers of corruption!
15.And We gave David and Solomon knowledge and they said, `Praise belongs to Godwho has preferred us over many of His believing servants.'
16.And Solomon was David's heir, and he said, `Men, we have been taught thespeech of the birds, and we have been given of everything; surely this isindeed the manifest bounty.'
17.And his hosts were mustered to Solomon, jinn, men and birds, duly disposed;
18.till, when they came on the Valley of Ants, an ant said, 'Ants, enter yourdwelling-places, lest Solomon and his hosts crush you, being unaware!'
19.But he smiled, laughing atits words, and he said, `My Lord, dispose methat I may be thankful for Thy blessing wherewith Thou hast blessed me and myfather and mother, and that I may do righteousness well-pleasing to Thee;and do Thou admit me, by Thy mercy, amongst Thy righteous servants.'
20.And he reviewed the birds; then he said, `How is it with me, that I do notsee the hoopoe? Or is he among the absent?
21.Assuredly I will chastise him with a terrible chastisement, or I willslaughter him, or he bring me a clear authority.'
22.But he tarried not long, and said, `I have comprehended that which thouhast not comprehended, and I have come from Sheba to thee with a suretiding.
%379% 23.I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given of everything,and she possesses a mighty throne.
24.I found her and her people prostrating to the sun, apart from God; Satanhas decked out fair their deeds to them and he has barred them from the way,and therefore they are not guided,
25.so that they prostrate not themselves to God, who brings forth what is hiddenin the heavens and earth; and He knows what you conceal and what youpublish.
26.SUJDAH AYA @God: there is no god but He, the Lord of the Mighty Throne.'
27.Said he, `Now we will see whether thou hast spoken truly, or whetherthou art amongst those that lie.
28.Take this letter of mine, and cast it unto them, then turn back from themand see what they shall return.'
29.She said, `O Council, see a letter honourable has been cast unto me.
30.It is from Solomon, and it is "In the Name of God, the Merciful,the Compassionate.
31.Rise not up against me, but come to me in surrender."
32.She said, `O council, pronounce to me concerning my affair;I am not used to decide an affair until you bear me witness.'
33.They said, `We possess force and we possess great might.The affair restswith thee; so consider what thou wilt command.'
34.She said, `Kings, when they enter a city, disorder it and make the mightyones of its inhabitants abased.Even So they too will do.
35.Now I will send them a present, and see what the envoys bringback.
%380% 36.`But when he came to Solomon he said, `What, would you succour me withwealth, and what God gave me is better then what He has given you? Nay, butinstead you rejoice in your gift!
37.Return thou to them; we shall assuredly come against them with hosts theyhave not power to resist, and we shall expel them from there, abased andutterly humbled.'
38.He said, `O Council, which one of you will bring me her throne before theycome to me in surrender?'
39.An efreet of the jinns said, `I will bring it to thee, before thou risestfrom thy place; I have strength for it and I am trusty.'
40.Said he who possessed knowledge of the Book, `I will bring it to thee, beforeever thy glance returns to thee.' Then, when he saw it settled before him,he said, `This is of my Lord's bounty that He may try me, whether I amthankful or ungrateful.Whosoever gives thanks gives thanks only for his ownsoul's good, and whosoever is ungrateful--my Lord is surely All-sufficient,All-generous.'
41.He said,`Disguise her throne for her, and we shall behold whether she isguided or if she is of those that are not guided.'
42.So, when she came, it was said, `Is thy throne like this?' She said, `Itseems the same.' `And we were given the knowledge before her, and we were insurrender,
43.but that she served, apart from God, barred her, for she was of a people ofunbelievers.'
44.It was said to her `Enter the pavilion.' But when she saw it, she supposed itwas a spreading water and she bared her legs.He said, `It is a pavilionsmoothed of crystal.' She said, `My Lord, indeed I have wronged myself, and Isurrender with Solomon to God, the Lord of all Being.'
%381% 45.And We sent to Thamood their brother Salih: `Serve you God!' And behold,they were two parties, that were disputing one with another.
46.He said, `O my people, why do you seek to hasten evil before good? Why doyou not ask forgiveness of God? Haply so you will find mercy.'
47.They said, `We augur ill of thee and of those that are with thee.' He said,`Your augury is with God; nay, but you are a people being proved.'
48.Now in the city there were nine persons Who did corruption in the land, andput not things right;
49.they said, `Swear you, one to another, by God, "We will attack him and hisfamily by night, then we will tell his protector, We were not witnesses ofthe destruction of his family; and assuredly we are truthful men." '
50.And they devised a device, and We likewise devised a device, while theyWere not aware;
51.and behold, how was the end of their device! For We destroyed them and theirpeople all together.
52.Those are their houses, all fallen down because of the evil they committed;surely in that is a sign for a people who have knowledge.
53.And We delivered who believed and were godfearing.
54.And Lot, when he said to his people, `What, do you commit indecencywith your eyes open?
55.What, do you approach men lustfully instead of woman? No, you are a peoplethat are ignorant.'
%382% 56.And the only answer of his people was that they said, `Expel the folkof Lot from your city; they are men that keep themselves clean!'
57.So We delivered him and his family, except his wife; We decreed she should beof those that tarried.
58.And We rained on them a rain of stones.; and evil indeed is the rain ofthem that are warned.
59.Say: `Praise belongs to God, and peace be on His servants whom He haschosen.' What, is God better, or that they associate?
60.He who created the heavens and earth, and sent down for you out of heavenwater; and We caused to grow therewith gardens full of loveliness whose treesyou could never grow.Is there a god with God? Nay, but they are a peoplewho assign to Him equals!
61.He who made the earth a fixed place and set amidst it rivers and appointedfor it firm mountains and placed a partition between the two seas.Is there agod with God? Nay, but the most of them have no knowledge.
62.He who answers the constrained, when he calls unto Him, and removes the eviland appoints you to be successors in the earth.Is there a god with God?Little indeed do you remember.
63.He who guides you in the shadows of the land and the sea and looses thewinds, bearing good tidings before His mercy.Is there a god with God? Highexalted be God, above that which they associate!
%383% 64.Who originates creation, then brings it back again, and provides you out ofheaven and earth.Is there a god with God? Say: `Produce your proof, if youspeak truly.'
65.Say: `None knows the Unseen in the heavens and earth except God.And theyare not aware when they shall be raised;
66.nay, but their knowledge fails as to the Hereafter; nay, they are in doubt ofit; nay, they are blind to it.
67.The unbelievers say, `What, when we are dust, and our fathers, shall weindeed be brought forth?
68.We have been promised this, and our fathers before; this is naught but thefairy-tales of the ancients.'
69.Say: `Journey in the land, then behold how was the end of the sinners.'
70.Do not sorrow for them, nor be thou straitened for what theydevise.
71.They say, `When shall this promise come to pass, if you speak the truth?'
72.Say: `It may be that riding behind you already is some part of that you seekto hasten on.'
73.Surely thy Lord is bountiful to men; but most of them are not thankful.
74.Surely thy Lord knows what their hearts conceal, and what they publish.
75.And not a thing is there hidden in heaven and earth but it is a ManifestBook.
76.Surely this Koran relates to the Childrenof Israel most of that concerning which they are at variance;
%384% 77.it is a guidance, and a mercy unto the believers.
78.Surely thy Lord will decide between them by His Judgment; He is theAll-mighty, the All-knowing.
79.So put thy trust in God; thou are upon the manifest truth.
80.Thou shalt not make the dead to hear, neither shalt thou make the deaf tohear the call when they turn about, retreating.
81.Thou shalt not guide the blind out of their error neither shalt thou make anyto hear, save such as believe in Our signs, and so surrender.
82.When the Word falls on them, We shall bring forth for them out of the earth abeast that shall speak unto them: `Mankind had no faith in Our signs.'
83.Upon the day when We shall muster out of every nation troop of those thatcried lies to Our signs, duly disposed,
84.till, when they are come, He shall say, `Did you cry lies to My signs, notcomprehending them in knowledge, or what have you been doing?'
85.And the Word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed, whilethey speak naught.
86.Have they not seen how We made the night for them, to repose in it, and theday, to see? Surely in that is a sign for a people who are believers.
87.On the day the Trumpet is blown, and terrified is whosoever is in the heavensand earth, excepting whom God wills, and every one shall come to Him, allutterly abject;
88.and thou shalt see the mountains, that thou supposest fixed, passing by likeclouds--God's handiwork, who has created everything very well.He is awareof the things you do.
%385% 89.Whosoever comes with a good deed, he shall have better than it; and theyshall be secure from terror that day.
90.And whosoever comes with an evil deed, their faces shall be thrust into theFire: `Are you recompensed but for what you did?
91.I have only been commanded to serve the Lord of this territory which He hasmade sacred; to Him belongs everything.And I have been commanded to be thosethat surrender,
92.and to recite the Koran.So whosoever is guided, is only guided to his owngain; and whosoever goes astray, say: `I am naught but a warner.'
93.And say: `Praise belongs to God.He shall show you His signs and you willrecognise them.Thy Lord is not heedless of the things you do.'
<28,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ta Sin Mim
2.Those are the signs of the Manifest Book.
3.We Will recite to thee something of the tiding of Moses and Pharaohtruthfully, for a people who believe.
4.Now Pharaoh had exalted himself in the land and had divided its inhabitantsinto sects, abasing one party of them, slaughtering their sons, and sparingtheir women; for he was of the workers of corruption.
5.Yet We desired to be gracious to those that were abased in the land, and tomake them leaders, and to make them the inheritors,
%386% 6.and to establish them in the land, and to show Pharaoh and Haman, and theirhosts, what they were dreading from them.
7.So We revealed to Moses' mother, `Suckle him, then, when thou fearest forhim, cast him into the sea, and do not fear, neither sorrow, for We shallreturn him to thee, and shall appoint him one of the Envoys.'
8.So then the folk of Pharaoh picked him out to be an enemy and a sorrow tothem; certainly Pharaoh and Haman, and their hosts, were of the sinners.
9.Said Pharaoh 's wife, `He will be a comfort to me and thee.Slay him not;perchance he will profit us, we will take him for a son.' And they were notaware.
10.On the morrow the heart of Moses' mother become empty, and she wellnighdisclosed him had We not strengthened her heart, that she might be among thebelievers;
11.and she said to his sister, `Follow him.' and she perceived him from afar,even while they were not aware.
12.Now We had forbidden to him aforetime to be suckled by any foster-mother;therefore she said, `Shall I direct you to the people of a household who willtake charge of him for you and look after him?'
13.So We returned him to his mother that she might be comforted and not sorrow,and that she might know that the promise of God is true; but most of them donot know.
%387% 14.And when he was fully grown and in the perfection of his strength, We gavehim judgment and knowledge; even so do We recompense the good-doers.
15.And he entered the city, at a time when its people were unheeding, and foundthere two men fighting; the one was of his own party, and the other was ofhis enemies.Then the one that was of his party cried to him to aid himagainst the other that was of his enemies; so Moses struck him, anddespatched him, and said, `This is of Satan's doing; he is surely an enemymisleading, manifest.'
16.He said, `My Lord, I have wronged myself.Forgive me!' So God forgave himfor He is the All-forgiving, the All-compassionate.
17.He said, `My Lord, forasmuch as Thou hast blessed me, I will never be apartisan of the sinners.'
18.Now in the morning he was in the city, fearful and vigilant; and behold, theman who had sought his succour on the day before cried out to him again.Moses said to him, `Clearly thou art a quarreller.'
19.But when he would have assaulted the man who was an enemy to them both, theman said, `Moses, dost thou desire to slay me, even as thou slewest a livingsoul yesterday? Thou only desirest to be a tyrant in the land; thou desirestnot to be of them that put things right.'
20.Then came a man from the furthest part of the city, running; he said, `Moses,the Council are conspiring to slay thee.Depart; I am one of thy sincereadvisers.'
21.So he departed therefrom, fearful and vigilant; he said, `My Lord, deliver mefrom the people of the evildoers.'
%388% 22.And when he turned his face towards Midian he said, `It may be that my Lordwill guide me on the right way.'
23.And when hecame to the waters of Midian he found a company of the peoplethere drawing water, and he found, apart from them, two women holding backtheir flocks.He said, `What is your business?' They said, `We may not drawwater until the shepherds drive off, and our father is passing old.'
24.So he drew water for them; then he turned away to the shade, and he said, `Omy Lord, surely I have need of whatever good Thou shalt have sent downupon me.'
25.Then came one of the two women to him, walking modestly, and said, `My fatherinvites thee, that he may recompense thee with the wage of thy drawing waterfor us.' So when he came to him and had related to him the story, he said,`Be not afraid; thou hast escaped from the people of theevildoers.'
26.Said one of the two women, `Father, hire him; surely the best man thou cansthire is the one strong and trusty.'
27.He said, `I desire to marry thee to one of these my two daughters, oncondition that thou hirest thyself to me for eight years.If thou completestten, that shall be ofthy own accord; I do not desire to press hard uponthee.Thou shalt assuredly find me, if God wills, one of the righteous.'
28.Said he, `So let it be between me and thee.Whichever of the two terms Ifulfil, it shall be no injustice to me; and God is guardian of what we say.'
%389% 29.So when Moses had accomplished the term and departed with his household, heobserved on the side of the Mount a fire.He said to his household, `Tarryyou here; I observe a fire.Perhaps I shall bring you news of it, or afaggot from the fire, that haply you shall warm yourselves.'
30.When he came to it, a voice cried from the right bank of the watercourse, inthe sacred hollow, coming from the tree: `Moses, I am God, the Lord of allBeing.
31.Cast down thy staff.' And when he saw it quivering like a serpent, he turnedabout retreating, and turned not back.`Moses, come forward, and fear not;for surely thou art in security.
32.Insert thy hand into thy bosom, and it will come forth white without evil;and press to thee thy arm, that thou be not afraid.So these shall be twoproofs from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his Council; for surely they are anungodly people.'
33.Said he, `My Lord, I have indeed slain a living soul among them, and I fearthat they will slay me.
34.Moreover my brother Aaron is more eloquent than I.Send him with me as ahelper and to confirm I speak truly, for I fear they will cry me lies.'
35.Said He, `We strengthen thy arm by means of thy brother, and We shall appointto you an authority, so that they shall not reach you because of Our signs;you, and whoso follows you, shall be the victors.'
%390% 36.So when Moses came to them with Our signs, clear signs, they said, `This isnothing but a forged sorcery.We never heard of this among our fathers,the ancients.'
37.But Moses said, `My Lord knows very well who comes with the guidance fromHim, and shall possess the Ultimate Abode; surely the evildoers will notprosper.'
38.And pharaoh said, `Council, I know not that you have any god but me. Kindleme, Haman, a fire upon the clay, and make me a tower, that I may mount up toMoses' god; for I think that he is one of the liars.'
39.And he waxed proud in the land, he and his hosts, wrongfully; and theythought they should not be returned to Us.
40.Therefore We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea; so beholdhow was the end of the evildoers!
41.And We appointed them leaders, calling to the Fire; and on the Day ofResurrection they shall not be helped;
42.and We pursued them in this world with a curse and on the Day of Resurrectionthey shall be among the spurned.
43.And We gave Moses the Book, after that We had destroyed the formergenerations, to be examples and a guidance and a mercy, that haply so theymight remember.%391% 44.Thou wast not upon the western side when We decreed to Moses the commandment,nor wast thou of those witnessing;45.but We raised up generations, and long their lives continued.Neither wastthou a dweller among the Midianites, reciting to them Our signs; but We weresending Messengers.46.Thou wast notupon the side of the Mount when We called; but for a mercyfrom thy Lord, that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner came beforethee, and that haply they may remember.
47.Else, did an affliction visit them for that their own hands have forwardedthen they might say, `Our Lord, why didst Thou not send a Messenger to usthat we might follow Thy signs and so be among the believers?'
48.Yet when the truth came to them from Ourselves, they said, `Why has he notbeen given the like of that Moses was given?' But they, did they notdisbelieve also in what Moses was given aforetime? They said, `A pair ofsorceries mutually supporting each other.' They said, `We disbelieve both.'
49.Say: `Bring a Book from God that gives better guidance then these, and followit, if you speak truly.'
50.Then if they do not answer thee, know that they are only following theircaprices; and who is further astray than he who follows his caprice withoutguidance from God? Surely God guides not the people of theevildoers.
%392% 51.Now We have brought them the Word; haply they may remember.
52.Those to whom We gave the Book before this believe in it
53.and, when it is recited to them, they say, `We believe in it; surely it isthe truth from our Lord.Indeed, even before it we had surrendered.'
54.These shall be given their wage twice over for that they patiently endured,and avert evil with good, and expend of that We have provided them.
55.When they hear idle talk, they turn away from it and say, `We have our deeds,and you your deeds.Peace be upon you! We desire not theignorant.'
56.Thou guidest not whom thou likest, but God guides whom He wills, and knowsvery well those that are guided.
57.They say, `Should we follow the guidance with thee, we shall be snatched fromour land.' Have We not established for them a sanctuary secure, to which arecollected the fruits of everything, as a provision from Us? But most of themknow not.
58.How many a city We have destroyed that flourished in insolent ease! Thoseare their dwelling-places, undwelt in after them, except a little; Ourselvesare the inheritors.
59.Yet thy Lord never destroyed the cities until He sent in their mother-citya Messenger, to recite Our signs unto them; and We never destroyedthe cities, save that their inhabitants were evildoers.
%393% 60.Whatever thing you have been given is the enjoyment of the present life andits adornment; and what is with God is better and more enduring.Will younot understand?
61.What, is he to whom We have promised a fair promise, and he receives it,like him to whom We have given the enjoyment of the present life, then heon the Resurrection Day shall be of those that are arraigned?
62.Upon the day when He shall call to them, and He shall say, `Where now are Myassociates whom you were asserting?' Those against whom the Word isrealized,
63.they shall say, `Our Lord, those whom we perverted, we perverted them even aswe ourselves erred.We declare our innocence unto Thee; it was not us thatthey were serving.'
64.It shall be said, `Call you now upon your associates!' And they will callupon them, but they shall not answer them, and they shall see thechastisement--ah, if they had been guided!
65.Upon the day when He shall call to them, and He shall say,'What answer gave you to the Envoys?'
66.Upon that day the tidings will be darkened for them, nor will they askeach other.
67.But as for him who repents, and believes, and works righteousness, haply heshall be among the prosperers.
68.Thy Lord creates whatsoever He will and He chooses; they have not the choice.Glory be to God! High be He exalted above that they associate!
69.And thy Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they publish.
70.And He is God; there is no god but He.His is the praise in the former as inthe latter; His too is the Judgment, and unto Him you shall bereturned.
%394% 71.Say: `What think you? If God should make the night unceasing over you, untilthe Day of Resurrection, what god other than God shall bring youillumination? Will you not hear?'
72.Say: `What think you? If God should make the day unceasing over you, untilthe Day of Resurrection, what god other than God shall bring you night torepose in? Will you not see?
73.Of His mercy He has appointed for you night and day, for you to repose inand seek after His bounty, that haply you will be thankful.'
74.Upon the day when He shall call to them, and He shall say, `Where now are Myassociates whom you were asserting?' And We shall draw out from every nationa witness, and say,
75.`Produce your proof!' Then will thy know that Truth is God's, and there shallgo astray from them that they were forging.
76.Now Korah was of the people of Moses; he became insolent to them, for we hadgiven him treasures such that the very keys of them were too heavy a burdenfor a company of men endowed with strength.When his people said to him, `Donot exult; God loves not those that exult;
77.but seek, amidst that which God has given thee, the Last Abode, and forgetnot thy portion of the present world; and do good, as God has been good tothee.And seek not to work corruption in the earth; surely God loves not theworks of corruption.'
%395% 78.He said, `What I have been given is only because of a knowledge that is inme.`What, did he not know that God had destroyed before him generations ofmen stronger than he in might, and more numerous in multitude? And yet thesinners shall not be questioned concerning their sins.
79.So he went forth unto his people in his adornment.Those who desired thepresent life said, `Would that we possessed the like of that Koran has beengiven! Surely he is a man of mighty fortune.'
80.But those to whom knowledge had been given said, `Woe upon you! The reward ofGod is better for him who believes, and works righteousness; and none shallreceive it except the steadfast.'
81.So We made the earth to swallow him and his dwelling and there was no host tohelp him, apart from God, and he was helpless;
82.and in the morning those who had longed to be in his place the day beforewere saying, `Ah, God outspreads and straitens His provision to whomsoeverHe will of His servants.Had God not been gracious to us, He would have madeus to be swallowed too.Ah, the unbelievers do not prosper.'
83.That is the Last Abode; We appoint it for those who desire not exorbitance inthe earth, nor corruption.The issue ultimate is to the godfearing.
84.Whoso brings a good deed shall have better than it; and whoso brings an evildeed--those who have evil deeds shall only be recompensed for that they weredoing.
%396% 85.He who imposed the Recitation upon thee shall surely restore thee to a placeof homing.Say: `My Lord knows very well who comes with guidance, and who isin manifest error.'
86.Thou didst not hope that the Book should be cast unto thee, except it be as amercy from thy Lord; so be thou not a partisan of the unbelievers.
87.Let them not bar thee from the signs of God, after that they have beensent down to thee.And call upon thy Lord, and be thou not of the idolaters.
88.And call not upon another god with God; there is god but He.All thingsperish, except His Face.Hisis the Judgment, and unto Him you shall bereturned.
<29,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.Do the people reckon that they will be left to say `We believe,' and will notbe tried?
3.We certainly tried those that were before them, and assuredly God knows thosewho speak truly, and assuredly He knows the liars.
4.Or do they reckon, those who do evil deeds, that they will outstrip Us? Illthey judge!
5.Whoso looks to encounter God, God's term is coming; He is the All-hearing,the All-knowing.
6.Whosoever struggles, struggles only to his own gain; surely God isAll-sufficient nor needs any being.
%397% 7.And those who believe, and do righteous deeds, We shall surely acquit them oftheir evil deeds, and shall recompense them the best of what they weredoing.
8.We have charged man, that he be kind to his parents; but if they strive withthee to make thee associate with Me that whereof thou hast no knowledge, thendo not obey them; unto Me you shall return, and I shall tell you what youwere doing.
9.And those who believe, and do righteous deeds assuredly We shall admit themamong the righteous.
10.Some men there are who say,' We believe in God,' but when such a man is hurtin God's cause, he makes the persecution of men as it were God'schastisement; then if help comes from thy Lord, he will say `We were withyou.' What, does not God know very well what is in the breasts of allbeings?
11.God surely knows the believers, and He knows the hypocrites.
12.The unbelievers say to the believers, `Follow our path, and let us carryyour offences'; yet they cannot carry anything, even of their own offences;they are truly liars.
13.They shall certainly carry their loads, and other loads along with theirloads, and upon the Day of Resurrection they shall surely be questionedconcerning that they were forging.
14.Indeed, We sent Noah to his people, and he tarried among them a thousandyears, all but fifty; so the Flood seized them, while they were evildoers.
%398% 15.Yet We delivered him, and those who were in the ship, and appointed it for asign unto all beings.
16.And Abraham, when he said to his people, `Serve God, and fear Him; that isbetter for you, did you know.
17.You only serve, apart from God, idols and you create a calumny; those youserve, apart from God, have no power to provide for you.So seek after yourprovision with God, and serve Him, and be thankful to Him; unto Him you shallbe returned.
18.But if you cry me lies, nations cried lies before you; and it is only for theMessenger to deliver the Manifest Message.'
19.Have they not seen how God originates creation, then brings it back again?Surely that is an easy matter for God.
20.Say: `Journey in the land, then behold how He originated creation; then Godcauses the second growth to grow; God is powerful overeverything,
21.chastising whom He will, and having mercy on whomsoever He will, and unto Himyou shall be turned.
22.You are not able to frustrate Him either in the earth or in heaven; and youhave not, apart from God, either protector or helper.
23.And those who disbelieve in God's signs and the encounter with Him--theydespair of My mercy, and there awaits them a painful chastisement.
%399% 24.But the only answer of his people was that they said, `Slay him , orburn him!' Then God delivered him from the fire; surely in that are signsfor a people who believe.
25.And he said, `You have only taken to yourselves idols, apart from God, asa mark of mutual love between you in the present life; then upon the Day ofResurrection you will deny one another, and you will curse one another,and your refuge will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.'
26.But Lot believed him; and he said, `I will flee to my Lord; He is theAll-mighty, the All-wise.'
27.And We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and We appointed the Prophecy and the Bookto be among his seed; We gave him his wage in this world, and in the world tocome he shall be among the righteous.
28.And Lot, when he said to his people `Surely you commit such indecency asnever any being in all the world committed beforeyou.
29.What, do you approach men, and cut the way, and commit in your assemblydishonour? `But the only answer of his people was that they said, `Thenbring us the chastisement of God, if thou speakest truly.'
30.He said, `My Lord, help me against the people that workcorruption.'
%400% 31.And when Our messengers came to Abraham with the good tidings, they said, `Weshall destroy the people of this city, for its people are evildoers.'
32.He said, `Lot is in it.' They said, `We know very well who is in it;assuredly We shall deliver him and his family, except his wife; she hasbecome of those that tarry.'
33.When that Our messengers came to Lot he was troubled on their account anddistressed for them; but they said, `Fear not, neither sorrow, for surely weshall deliver thee and thy family, except thy wife; she has become of thosethat tarry.
34.We shall send down upon the people of this city wrath out of heaven for theirungodliness.'
35.And indeed, We have left thereof a sign, a clear sign, unto a people whounderstand.
36.And to Midian their brother Shuaib; he said, `O my people, serve God, andlook you for the Last Day; and do not mischief in the land, workingcorruption.'
37.But they cried lies to him; so the earthquake seized them, and morning foundthem in their habitation fallen prostrate.
38.And Ad, and Thamood--it has become clear to you from their dwelling-places;and Satan decked out fair to them their works, and barred them from the way,though they saw clearly.
%401% 39.And Korah, and Pharaoh, and Haman; Moses came to them with the clear signs,but they waxed proud in the earth, yet they outstripped Us not.
40.Each We seized for his sin; and of them against some We loosed a squall ofpebbles and some were seized by the Cry Blast., and some We made the earthto swallow, and some We drowned; God would never wrong them, but they wrongedthemselves.
41.The likeness of those who have taken to them protectors, apart from God, isas the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house; and surely thefrailest of houses is the house of the spider, did they but know.
42.God knows whatever thing they call upon apart from Him; He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
43.And those similitudes-We strike them for the people, but none understandsthem save those who know.
44.God created the heavens and the earth with the truth; surely in that is asign to the believers.
45.Recite what has been revealed to thee of the Book, and perform the prayer;prayer forbids indecency and dishonour.God's remembrance is greater; andGod knows the things you work.
%402% 46.Dispute not with the People of the Book save in the fairer manner, except forthose of them that do wrong; and say, `We believe in what has been sent downto us, and what has been sent down to you; our God and your God is One, andto Him we have surrendered.'
47.Even so We have sent down to thee the Book.Those to whom We have given theBook believe in it; and some of these believe in it; and none denies Oursigns but the unbelievers.
48.Not before this didst thou recite any Book, or inscribe it with thy righthand, for then those who follow falsehood would have doubted.
49.Nay; rather it is signs, clear signs in the breasts of those who have beengiven knowledge; and none denies Our signs but the evildoers.
50.They say, `Why have signs not been sent down upon him from his Lord?' Say:`The signs are only with God, and I am only a plain warner.'
51.What, is it not sufficient for them that We have sent down upon thee the Bookthat is recited to them? Surely in that is a mercy, and a reminder to apeople who believe.
52.Say: `God suffices as a witness between me and you.' He knows whatsoever isin the heavens and earth.Those who believe in vanity and disbelieve inGod--those, they are the losers.
%403% 53.And they demand of thee to hasten the chastisement! But for a stated termthe chastisement would have come upon them; but it shall come upon themsuddenly, when they are not aware.
54.They demand of thee to hasten the chastisement! Lo, Gehenna Hell.encompasses the unbelievers.
55.Upon the day the chastisement shall overwhelm them from above them and fromunder their feet, and He shall say, `Taste now what you weredoing!'
56.O My servants who believe, surely My earth is wide; therefore Me do youserve!
57.Every soul shall taste of death; then unto Us you shall be returned.
58.And those who believe, and do righteous deeds, We shall surely lodge them inlofty chambers of Paradise, underneath which rivers flow, therein dwellingforever; and excellent is the wage of those who labour,
59.such men as are patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
60.How many a beast that bears not its own provision, but God provides for itand you! He is the All-hearer, the All-knower.
61.If thou askest them, `Who created the heavens and the earth and subjected thesun and the moon?' they will say, `God.' How then are they perverted?
62.God outspreads and straitens His provision to whomsoever He will of Hisservants; God has knowledge of everything.
63.If thou askest them, `Who sends down out of heaven water, and therewithrevives the earth after it is dead?' they will say, `God.' Say: `Praisebelongs to God.' Nay, but most of them have no understanding.
%404% 64.This present life is naught but a diversion and a sport; surely the LastAbode is Life, did they but know.
65.When they embark in the ships, they call on God, making their religionsincerely His; but when He has delivered them to the land, they associateothers with Him,
66.that they may be ungrateful for what We have given them, and take theirenjoyment; they will soon know!
67.Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary secure, while all aboutthem the people are snatched away? What, do they believe in vanity, and dothey disbelieve in God's blessing?
68.And who does greater evil than he who forges against God a lie, or cries liesto the truth when it comes to him? What, is there not in Gehenna Hell alodging for the unbelievers?
69.But those who struggle in Our cause, surely We shall guide them in Our ways;and God is with the good-doers.
<30,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.The Romans have been vanquished
3.in the nearer part of the land; and, after their vanquishing,they shall be the victors
4.in a few years.To God belongs the Command before and after, and on that daythe believers shall rejoice
5.in God's help; God helps whomsoever He will; and He is the All-mighty, theAll-compassionate.
%405% 6.The promise of God! God fails not His promise, but most men do not know it.
7.They know an outward part of the present life, but of the Hereafter they areheedless.
8.What, have they not considered within themselves? God created not theheavens and the earth, and what between them is, save with the truth and astated term; yet most men disbelieve in the encounter with their Lord.
9.What, have they not journeyed in the land and behold how was the end of thosebefore them? They were stronger than themselves in might, and they ploughedup the earth and cultivated it more than they themselves have cultivated it;and their Messengers came to them with the clear signs; and God would neverwrong them, but themselves they wronged.
10.Then the end of those that did evil was evil, for that they cried lies to thesigns of God and mocked at them.
11.God originates creation, then brings it back again, then unto Him you shallbe returned.
12.Upon the day when the Hour is come, the sinners shall be confounded;
13.no intercessors shall they have amongst their associates, and they shalldisbelieve in their associates.
14.Upon the day when the Hour is come, that day they shall be divided;
15.as for those who believed, and did deeds of righteousness, they shall walkwith joy in a green meadow,
%406% 16.but as for those who disbelieved, and cried lies to Our signs and theencounter of the Hereafter, they shall be arraigned into the chastisement.
17.So glory be to God both in your evening hour and in your morning hour.
18.His is the praise in the heavens and earth, alike at the setting sunand in your noontide hour.
19.He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from theliving, and He revives the earth after it is dead; even so you shall bebrought forth.
20.And of His signs is that He created you of dust; then lo, you are mortals,all scattered abroad.
21.And of His signs is that He created for you, of yourselves, spouses, that youmight repose in them, and He has set between you love and mercy.Surely inthat are signs for a people who consider.
22.And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and the variety ofyour tongues and hues.Surely in that are signs for all living beings.
23.And of His signs is your slumbering by night and day, and your seeking afterHis bounty.Surely in that are signs for a people who hear.
24.And of His signs He shows you lightning, for fear and hope, and that He sendsdown out of heaven water and He revives the earth after it is dead.Surelyin that are signs for a people who understand.
%407% 25.And of His signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by His command;then, when He calls you once and suddenly, out of the earth, lo you shallcome forth.
26.To Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth; all obey His will.
27.And it is He who originates creation, then brings it back again, and it isvery easy for Him.His is the loftiest likeness in the heavens and theearth; He is the All mighty, the All-wise.
28.He has struck for you a similitude from yourselves; do you have, among thatyour right hands own, associates in what We have provided for you so that youare equal in regard to it, you fearing them as you fear each other? So Wedistinguish the signs for a people who understand.
29.Nay, but the evildoers follow their own caprices, without knowledge; so whoshall guide those whom God has led astray? They have no helpers.
30.So set thy face to the religion, a man of pure faith--God's original uponwhich He originated mankind.There is no changing God's creation.That isthe right religion; but most men know it not--
31.turning to Him.And fear you Him , and perform the prayer, and be notof the idolaters,
32.even of those who have divided up their religion, and become sects, eachseveral party rejoicing in what is theirs.
%408% 33.When some affliction visits mankind, they call unto their Lord, turning toHim; then, when He lets them taste mercy from Him, lo, a party of them assignassociates to their Lord,
34.that they may be ungrateful for what We have given them.`Take yourenjoyment; certainly you will soon know.'
35.Or have We sent down any authority upon them, such as speaks of that theyassociate with Him ?
36.And when We let men taste mercy, they rejoice in it; but if some evil befallsthem for that their own hands have forwarded, behold, they despair.
37.Have they not seen that God outspreads and straitens His provision to whom Hewill? Surely in that are signs for a people who believe.
38.And give the kinsman his right, and the needy, and the traveller; that isbetter for those who desire God's Face; those--they are the prosperers.
39.And what you give in usury, that it may increase upon the people's wealth,increases not with God; but what you give in alms, desiring God's Face,those--they receive recompense manifold.
40.God is He that created you, then He provided for you, then He shall make youdead, then He shall give you life; is there any of your associates does aughtof that? Glory be to Him! High be He exalted above that theyassociate!
41.Corruption has appeared in the land and sea, for that men's own hands haveearned, that He may let them taste some part of that which they have done,that haply so they may return.
%409% 42.Say: `Journey in the land, then behold how was the end of those that werebefore; most of them were idolaters.'
43.So set thy face to the true religion before there comes a day from God thatcannot be turned back; on that day they shall be sundered apart.
44.Whoso disbelieves, his unbelief shall be charged against him; and whosoeverdoes righteousness--for themselves they are making provision,
45.that He may recompense those who believe and do righteous deeds of Hisbounty; He loves not the unbelievers.
46.And of His signs is that He looses the winds, bearing good tidings and thatHe may let you taste of His mercy, and that the ships may run at Hiscommandment, and that you may seek His bounty; haply so you will bethankful.
47.Indeed, We sent before thee Messengers unto their people, and they broughtthem the clear signs; then We took vengeance upon those who sinned; and itwas ever a duty incumbent upon Us, to help the believers.
48.God is He that looses the winds, that stir up clouds, and He spreads them inheaven how He will, and shatters them; then thou seest the rain issuing outof the midst of them, and when He smites with it whomsoever of His servantsHe will, lo, they rejoice,
49.although before it was sent down on them before that they had been indespair.
50.So behold the marks of God's mercy, how He quickens the earth after it wasdead; surely He is the quickener of the dead, and He is powerful overeverything.
%410% 51.But if We loose a wind, and they see it growing yellow, they remain afterthat unbelievers.
52.Thou shalt not make the dead to hear, neither shalt thou make the deaf tohear the call when they turn about, retreating.
53.Thou shalt not guide the blind out of their error neither shalt thou make anyto hear except for such as believe in Our signs, and so surrender.
54.God is He that created you of weakness, then He appointed after weaknessstrength, then after strength He appointed weakness and grey hairs; Hecreates what He will, and He is the All-knowing, the All-powerful.
55.Upon the day when the Hour is come, the sinners shall swear they have nottarried above an hour; so they were perverted.
56.But those who have been given knowledge and faith shall say, `You havetarried in God's Book till the Day of the Upraising,
57.This is the Day of the Upraising, but you did not know.' So that day theirexcuses will not profit the evildoers, nor will they be suffered to makeamends.
58.Indeed, We have struck for the people in this Koran every manner ofsimilitude; and if thou bringest them a sign, those who are unbelievers willcertainly say, `You do nothing but follow falsehood.'
59.Even so God seals the hearts of those that know not.
60.So be thou patient; surely God's promise is true; and let not those who havenot sure faith make thee unsteady.
%411% <31,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.Those are the signs of the Wise Book
3.for a guidance and a mercy to the good-doers
4.who perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and have sure faith in theHereafter.
5.Those are upon guidance from their Lord; those are theprosperers.
6.Some men there are who buy diverting talk to lead astray from the way of Godwithout knowledge, and to take it in mockery; those--there awaits thema humbling chastisement.
7.And when Our signs are recited to such a man he turns away, waxing proud, asthough he heard them not, and in his ears were heaviness; so give him goodtidings of a painful chastisement.
8.Surely those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, there awaits themGardens of Bliss
9.therein to dwell forever--God's promise in truth; and He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
10.He created the heavens without pillars you can see, and He cast on the earthfirm mountains, lest it shake with you, and He scattered abroad in it allmanner of crawling thing.And We sent down out of heaven water, and causedto grow in it of every generous kind.
11.This is God's creation; now show me what those have created that are apartfrom Him! Nay, but the evildoers are in manifest error.
%412% 12.Indeed, We gave Lokman wisdom: `Give thanks to God.Whosoever gives thanksgives thanks only for his own soul's good, and whosoever is ungrateful--surely God is All-sufficient, All-laudable.'
13.And when Lokman said to his son, admonishing him, `O my son, do not associateothers with God; to associate others with God is a mighty wrong.'
14.And We have charged man concerning his parents--his mother bore him inweakness upon weakness, and his weaning was in two years'--Be thankful to Me,and to thy parents; to Me is the homecoming.
15.But if they strive with thee to make thee associate with Me that whereof thouhast no knowledge, then do not obey them.Keep them company honourable inthis world; but follow the way of him who turns to Me.Then unto Me youshall return, and I shall tell you what you were doing.'
16.`O my son, if it should be but the weight of one grain of mustard-seed, andthough it be in a rock, or in the heavens, or in the earth, God shall bringit forth; surely God is All-subtle, All-aware.
17.O my son, perform the prayer, and bid unto honour, and forbid dishonour.And bear patiently whatever may befall thee; surely that is true constancy.
18.Turn not thy cheek away from men in scorn, and walk not in the earthexultantly; God loves not any man proud and boastful.
19.Be modest in thy walk, and lower thy voice; the most hideous of voices isthe ass's.'
%413% 20.Have you not seen how that God has subjected to you whatsoever is in theheavens and earth, and He has lavished on you His blessings, outward andinward? And among men there is such a one that disputes concerning Godwithout knowledge or guidance, or an illuminating Book;
21.and when it is said to them, `Follow what God has sent down,' they say, `No;but we will follow such things as we found our fathers doing.' What? Eventhough Satan were calling them to the chastisement of the burning?
22.And whosoever submits his will to God, being a good-doer, has laid hold ofthe most firm handle; and unto God is the issue of all affairs.
23.And whoso disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve thee; unto Us they shallreturn, and We shall tell them what they did.Surely God knows all thethoughts within the breasts.
24.To them We give enjoyment a little, then We compel them to a harshchastisement.
25.If thou askest them, `Who created the heavens and the earth?' they will say,`God.' Say: `Praise belongs to God.' Nay, but most of them haveno knowledge.
26.To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; surely God--He isthe All-sufficient, the All-laudable.
27.Though all the trees in the earth werepens, and the sea--seven seas after itto replenish it, yet would the Words of God not be spent.God is All-mighty,All-wise.
28.Your creation and your upraising are as but as a single soul.God isAll-hearing, All-seeing.
%414% 29.Hast thou not seen how that God makes the night to enter into the day andmakes the day to enter into the night.and He has subjected the sun and themoon, each of them running to a stated term, and that God is aware of whatyou do?
30.That is because God--He is the Truth, and that they call upon apart fromHim--that is the false; and for that God is the All-high,the All-great.
31.Hast thou not seen how that the ships run upon the sea by the blessing ofGod, that He may show you some of His signs? Surely in that are signs forevery man enduring, thankful.
32.And when the waves cover them like shadows they call upon God, making theirreligion sincerely His; but when he has delivered them to the land, some ofthem are lukewarm.And none denies Our signs, except every ungratefultraitor.
33.Omen, fear your Lord, and dread a day when no father shall give satisfactionfor his child, and no child shall give satisfaction for his father whatever.Surely God's promise is true; so let not the present life delude you, and letnot the Deluder delude you concerning God.
34.Surely God--He has knowledge of the Hour; He sends down the rain; He knowswhat is in the wombs.No soul knows what it shall earn tomorrow, and no soulknows in what land it shall die.Surely God is All-knowing, All-aware.
%415% <32,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Alif Lam Mim
2.The sending down of the Book, wherein no doubt is, from the Lord of allBeing.
3.Or do they say, `He has forged it'?  Say: `Not so; it is the truth from thyLord that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner came before thee, thathaply so they may be guided.
4.God is He that created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is,in six days, then seated Himself upon the Throne. Apart from Him, you haveno protector neither mediator; will you not remember?
5.He directs the affair from heaven to earth, then it goes up to Him in oneday, whose measure is a thousand years of your counting.
6.He is the knower of the Unseen and the Visible, the All-mighty,the All-compassionate,
7.who has created all things well. And He originated the creation of manout of clay,
8.then He fashioned his progeny of an extraction of mean water,
9.then He shaped him, and breathed His spirit in him. And He appointed for youhearing, and sight, and hearts; little thanks you show.
10.They say, `What, when we have gone astray in the earth, shall we indeed be ina new creation?' Nay, but they disbelieve in the encounter withtheir Lord.
11.Say: `Death's angel, who has been charged with you, shall gather you, then toyour Lord you shall be returned.'
%416% 12.Ah, if thou couldst see the guilty hanging their heads before their Lord!`Our Lord, we have seen and heard; now return us, that we may dorighteousness, for we have sure faith.'
13.`If We had so willed, We could havegiven every soul its guidance; but now MyWord is realized--"Assuredly I shall fill Gehenna Hell with jinn and menall together."
14.So now taste, for that you forgot the encounter of this your day!  We indeedhave forgotten you. Taste the chastisement of eternity for that you weredoing!'
15.SUJDAH AYA @Only those believe in Our signs who, when they are reminded ofthem, fall down prostrate and proclaim the praise of their Lord, not waxingproud.
16.Their sides shun their couches as they call on their Lord in fear and hope;and they expend of that We have provided them.
17.No soul knows what comfort is laid up for them secretly, as a recompense forthat they were doing.
18.What?  Is he who has been a believer like unto him who has been ungodly?They are not equal.
19.As for those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness, there await themthe Gardens of the Refuge, in hospitality for that they were doing.
20.But as for the ungodly, their refuge shall be the Fire; as often as theydesire to come forth from it, they shall be restored into it, and it shall besaid to them, `Taste the chastisement of the Fire, which you criedlies to.'
%417% 21.And We shall surely let them taste the nearer chastisement, before thegreater; haply so they will return.
22.And who does greater evil than he who is reminded of the signs of his Lord,then turns away from them?  We shall take vengeance upon the sinners.
23.Indeed, We gave Moses the Book; so be not in doubt concerning the encounterwith him; and We appointed it for a guidance to the Children of Israel.
24.And We appointed from among them leaders guiding by Our command, when theyendured patiently, and had sure faith in Our signs.
25.Surely thy Lord will distinguish between them on the Resurrection Day,touching that whereon they were at variance.
26.Is it not a guidance to them, how many generations We destroyed before themin whose dwelling-places they walk?  Surely in that are signs; what, willthey not hear?
27.Have they not seen how We drive the water to the dry land and bring forthcrops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat?  What, will theynot see?
28.They also say, `When shall be this Victory, if you speak truly?'
29.Say: `On the Day of Victory their faith shall not profit the unbelievers,nor shall they be respited.'
30.So turn thou away from them, and wait; they too are waiting.
%418% <33,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O Prophet, fear God, and obey not the unbelievers and the hypocrites. God isAll-knowing, All-wise.
2.And follow what is revealed to thee from thy Lord; surely God is aware ofthe things you do.
3.And put thy trust in God; God suffices as a guardian.
4.God has not assigned to any man two hearts within his breast; nor has He madeyour wives, when you divorce, saying, `Be as my mother's back,' truly yourmothers, neither has He made your adopted sons your sons in fact. That isyour own saying, the words of your mouths; but God speaks the truth, andguides on the way.
5.Call them after their true fathers; that is more equitable in the sight ofGod. If you know not who their fathers were, then they are your brothers inreligion, and your clients. There is no fault in you if you make mistakes,but only in what your hearts premeditate. God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
6.The Prophet is nearer to the believers than their selves; his wives are theirmothers. Those who are bound by blood are nearer to one another in the Bookof God than the believers and the emigrants; nevertheless you should acttowards your friends honourably; that stands inscribed in the Book.
%419% 7.And when We took compact from the Prophets, and from thee, and from Noah, andAbraham, Moses, and Jesus, Mary's son; We took from them a solemn compact,
8.that He might question the truthful concerning their truthfulness; and He hasprepared for the unbelievers a painful chastisement.
9.O believers, remember God's blessing upon you when hosts came against you,and We loosed against them a wind, and hosts you saw not; and God sees thethings you do.
10.When they came against you from above you and from below you, and when youreyes swerved and your hearts reached your throats, while you thought thoughtsabout God;
11.there it was that the believers were tried, and shaken most mightily.
12.And when the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is sickness, said, `Godand His Messenger promised us only delusion.'
13.And when a party of them said, `O people of Yathrib, there is no abiding herefor you, therefore return!'  And a part of them were asking leave of theProphet, saying, `Our houses are exposed'; yet they were not exposed; theydesired only to flee.
14.And if entrance had been forced against them from those quarters, and thenthey had been asked to apostatise, they would have done so, and but tarriedabout it briefly.
15.Yet they had made covenant with God before that, that they would not turntheir backs; and covenants with God shall be questioned of.
%420% 16.Say: `Flight will not profit you, if you flee from death or slaying; you willbe given enjoyment of days then but little.'17.Say: `Who is he that shall defend you from God, if He desires evil for you,or desires mercy for you?'  They shall find for themselves, apart from God,neither protector nor helper.
18.God would surely know those of you who hinder, and those who say to theirbrothers, `Come to us,' and come to battle but little,
19.being niggardly towards you. When fear comes upon them, thou seest themlooking at thee, their eyes rolling like one who swoons of death; but whenthe fear departs, they flay you with sharp tongues, being niggardly topossess the good things. Those have never believed; God has made theirworks to fail; and that is easy for God.
20.They think the Confederates have not departed; and if the Confederates come,they will wish that they were desert-dwellers among the Bedouins asking fornews of you. If they were among you, they would fight butlittle.
21.You have had a good example in God's Messenger for whosoever hopes for Godand the Last Day, and remembers God oft.
22.When the believers saw the Confederates they said, `This is what God and HisMessenger promised us, and God and His Messenger have spoken truly.'  And itonly increased them in faith and surrender.
%421% 23.Among the believers are men who were true to their covenant with God; some ofthem have fulfilled their vow by death, and some are still awaiting, and theyhave not changed in the least;
24.that God may recompense the truthful ones for their truthfulness, andchastise the hypocrites, if He will, or turn again unto them. Surely God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.
25.And God sent back those that were unbelievers in their rage, and theyattained no good; God spared the believers of fighting. Surely God isAll-strong, All-mighty.
26.And He brought down those of the People of the Book who supported them fromtheir fortresses and cast terror in their hearts; some you slew, some youmade captive.
27.And He bequeathed upon you their lands, their habitations, and theirpossessions, and a land you never trod. God is powerful over everything.
28.O Prophet, say to thy wives: `If you desire the present life and itsadornment, come now, I will make you provision, and set you free withkindliness.
29.But if you desire God and His Messenger and the Last Abode, surely God hasprepared for those amongst you such as do good a mighty wage.'
30.Wives of the Prophet, whosoever among you commits a flagrant indecency, forher the chastisement shall be doubled; that is easy for God.
%422% 31.But whosoever of you is obedient to God and His Messenger, and doesrighteousness, We shall pay her her wage twice over; We have prepared for hera generous provision.
32.Wives of the Prophet, you are not as other women. If you are godfearing, benot abject in your speech, so that he in whose heart is sickness may belustful; but speak honourable words.
33.Remain in your houses; and display not your finery, as did the pagans of old.And perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and obey God and His Messenger.People of the House, God only desires to put away from you abominationand to cleanse you.
34.And remember that which is recited in your houses of the signs of God and theWisdom; God is All-subtle, All-aware.
35.Men and women who have surrendered, believing men and believing women,obedient men and obedient women, truthful men and truthful women,enduring men and enduring women, humble men and humble women,men and women who give in charity, men who fast and women who fast,men and women who guard their private parts,men and women who remember God oft--for them God has prepared forgivenessand a mighty wage.
%423% 36.It is not for any believer, man or woman, when God and His Messenger havedecreed a matter, to have the choice in the affair. Whosoever disobeysGod and His Messenger has gone astray into manifest error.
37.When thou saidst to him whom God had blessed and thou hadst favoured, `Keepthy wife to thyself, and fear God,' and thou wast concealing within thyselfwhat God should reveal, fearing other men; and God has better right for theeto fear Him. So when Zaid had accomplished what hewould of her, then Wegave her in marriage to thee, so that there should not be any fault in thebelievers, touching the wives of their adopted sons, when they haveaccomplished what they would of them; and God's commandment must beperformed.
38.There is no fault in the Prophet, touching what God has ordained for him--God's wont with those who passed away before; and God's commandment is doomdecreed;
39.who were delivering the Messages of God, and were fearing Him, and fearingnot any one except Him; and God suffices as a reckoner.
40.Muhammad is not the father of any one of your men, but the Messenger of God,and the Seal of the Prophets; God has knowledge of everything.
41.O believers , remember God oft,
42.and give Him glory at the dawn and in the evening .
43.It is He who blesses you , and His angels ,to bring you forth from the shadows into the light .He is All - compassionate to the believers .
%424% 44.Their greeting , on the day when they shall meet Him ,will be ' Peace ! ' And He has prepared for thema generous wage .
45.O Prophet , We have sent thee as a witness , and good tidings to bearand warning,
46.calling unto God by His leave, and as a light--giving lamp.
47.Give good tidings to the believers that there awaits them with God greatbounty.
48.And obey not the unbelievers and the hypocrites; heed not their hurt, but putthy trust in God; God suffices as a guardian.
49.O believers, when you marry believing women and then divorce them before youtouch them, you have no period to reckon against them; so make provision forthem, and set them free with kindliness.
50.O Prophet, We have made lawful for thee thy wives whom thou hast given theirwages and what they right hand owns, spoils of war that God has given thee,and the daughters of thy uncles paternal and aunts paternal, thy unclesmaternal and aunts maternal, who have emigrated with thee, and any womanbeliever, if she give herself to the Prophet and if the Prophet desire totake her in marriage, for thee exclusively, apart from the believers--We knowwhat We have imposed upon them touching their wives and what their righthands own--that there may be no fault in thee; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
%425% 51.Thou mayest put off whom thou wilt of them, and whom thou wilt thou mayesttake to thee; and if thou seekest any thou hast set aside there is no faultin thee. So it is likelier they will be comforted, and not sorrow, and everyone of them will be well-pleased with what thou givest her. God knows whatis in your hearts; God is All-knowing, All-clement.
52.Thereafter women are not lawful to thee, neither for thee to take other wivesin exchange for them, though their beauty please thee, except what thy righthand owns; God is watchful over everything.
53.O believers, enter not the houses of the Prophet, except leave is given youfor a meal, without watching for its hour. But when you are invited, thenenter; and when you have had the meal, disperse, neither lingering for idletalk; that is hurtful to the Prophet, and he is ashamed before you; but Godis not ashamed before the truth. And when you ask his wives for any object,ask them from behind a curtain; that is cleaner for your hearts and theirs.It is not for you to hurt God's Messenger, neither to marry his wives afterhim, ever; surely that would be, in God's sight, a monstrous thing.
54.Whether you reveal anything, or whether you conceal it, surely God hasknowledge of everything.
%426% 55.There is no fault in the Prophet's wives touching their fathers, their sons,their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their women, andwhat their right hands own. And fear you God; surely God is witness ofeverything.
56.God and His angels bless the Prophet. O believers, do you also bless him,and pray him peace.
57.Those who hurt God and His Messenger--them God has cursed in the presentworld and the world to come, and has prepared for them a humblingchastisement.
58.And those who hurt believing men and believing women, without that they haveearned it, have laid upon themselves calumny and manifest sin.
59.O Prophet, say to thy wives and daughters and the believing women, that theydraw their veils close to them; so it is likelier they will be known, and nothurt. God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
60.Now, if the hypocrites do not give over, and those in whose hearts there issickness and they that make commotion in the city, We shall assuredly urgethee against them and then they will be thy neighbours there only alittle;
61.cursed they shall be, and wheresoever they are come upon they shall be seizedand slaughtered all--
62.God's wont with those who passed away before; and thou shalt find no changingthe wont of God.
%427% 63.The people will question thee concerning the Hour. Say: `The knowledge of itis only with God; what shall make thee know?  Haply the Hour is nigh.'
64.God has cursed the unbelievers, and prepared for them a Blaze,
65.therein to dwell for ever; they shall find neither protector norhelper.
66.Upon the day when their faces are turned about in the Fire they shall say,`Ah, would we had obeyed God and the Messenger!'
67.They shall say, `Our Lord, we obeyed our chiefs and great ones, and they ledus astray from the way.
68.Our Lord, give them chastisement twofold, and curse them with a mightycurse!'
69.O believers, be not as those who hurt Moses , but God declared him quit ofwhat they said, and he was high honoured with God.
70.O believers, fear God, and speak words hitting the mark,
71.and He will set right your deeds for you and will forgive you your sins.Whosoever obeys God and His Messenger has won a mighty triumph.
72.We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but theyrefused to carry it and were afraid of it; and man carried it. Surely he issinful, very foolish.
73.That God may chastise the hypocrites, men and women alike, and the idolaters,men and women alike; and that God may turn again unto the believers, men andwomen alike. God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
%428% <34,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Praise belongsto God to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens andwhatsoever is in the earth. To Him belongs praise also in the Hereafter;He is the All-wise, the All-aware.
2.He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes forth from it, whatcomes down from heaven, and what goes up to it; He is the All-compassionate,the All-forgiving.
3.The unbelievers say, `The Hour will never come to us.' Say: `Yes indeed, bymy Lord, it shall come to you, by Him who knows the Unseen; not so much asthe weight of an ant in heaven and earth escapes from Him, neither is aughtsmaller than that, or greater, but it is in a Manifest Book;
4.that He may recompense those who believe, and do righteous deeds; theirsshall be forgiveness and generous provision.
5.And those who strive against Our signs to void them--theirs shall be achastisement of painful wrath.'
6.Those who have been given the knowledge see that what has been sent down tothee from thy Lord is the truth, and guides to the path of the All-mighty,the All-laudable.
7.The unbelievers say, `Shall we point you to a man who will tell you, when youhave been utterly torn to pieces, then you shall be in a new creation?'
%429% 8.What, has he forged against God a lie, or is he possessed?  Not so; but thosewho believe not in the Hereafter are in chastisement and far error.
9.Have they not regarded what lies before the and what lies behind them ofheaven and earth?  Did We will, We would make the earth to swallow them, orWe would drop down on them lumps pieces of sky from heaven. Surely in thatis a sign to every penitent servant.
10.And We gave David bounty from Us: `O you mountains, echo God's praiseswith him, and you birds!' And We softened for him iron:
11.`Fashion wide coats of mail, and measure well the links.'--And do yerighteousness, for surely I see the things you do.
12.And to Solomon the wind; its morning course was a month's journey, and itsevening course was a month's journey. And We made the Fount of Molten Brassto flow for him. And of the jinn, some worked before him by the leave of hisLord; and such of them as swerved away from Our commandment, We would letthem taste the chastisement of the Blaze;
13.fashioning for him whatsoever he would--places of worship, statues,porringers like water-troughs, and anchored cooking-pots. `Labour, O Houseof David, in thankfulness; for few indeed are those that are thankful amongMy servants.'
14.And when We decreed that he should die, naught indicated to them that heSoloman was dead but the Beast of the Earth devouring his staff; and whenhe fell down, the jinn saw clearly that, had they only known the Unseen, theywould not have continued in the humbling chastisement.
%430% 15.For Sheba also there was a sign in their dwelling-place--two gardens, one onthe right and one on the left: `Eat of your Lord's provision, and give thanksto Him; a good land, and a Lord All-forgiving.'
16.But they turned away; so We loosed on them the Flood of Arim, and We gavethem, in exchange for their two gardens, two gardens bearing bitter produceand tamarisk-bushes, and here and there a few lote-trees.
17.Thus We recompensed them for their unbelief; and do We ever recompense anybut the unbeliever?
18.And We set, between them and the cities that We have blessed, cities apparentand well We measured the journey between them: `Journey among them by nightand day in security!'
19.But they said, `Our Lord, prolong the stages of our travel'; and they wrongedthemselves, so We made them as but tales, and We tore them utterly to pieces.Surely in that are signs for every man enduring, thankful.
20.Iblis proved true his opinion of them, and they followed him, except a partyof the believers.
21.Yet he had no authority over them, but that We might know him who believedin the Hereafter from him who was in doubt thereof. Thy Lord is Guardianover everything.
22.Say: `Call on those you have asserted apart from God; they possess not somuch as the weight of an ant in the heavens nor in the earth; they have nopartnership in either of them, nor has He in them any supporter.'
%431%23.Intercession will not avail with Him save for him to whom He gives leave;till, when terror is lifted from their hearts, they will say, `What said yourLord?'  They will say, `The truth; and He is the All-high, the All-great.'
24.Say: `Who provides for you out of the heavens and the earth?' Say: `God.'Surely, either we or you are upon right guidance, of in manifest error.
25.Say: `You will not be questioned concerning our sins, neither shall we bequestioned as to what you do.'
26.Say: `Our Lord will bring us together, then make deliverance between us bythe truth. He is the Deliverer, the All-knowing.'
27.Say: `Show me those you have joined to Him as associates!  No indeed; ratherHe is God, the All-mighty, the All-wise.'
28.We have sent thee not, except to mankind entire, good tidings to bear, andwarning; but most men do not know it.
29.They say, `When shall this promise come to pass, if you speak the truth?'
30.Say: `You have the tryst of a day that you shall not put back by a singlehour nor put it forward.'
31.The unbelievers say, `We will not believe in this Koran, nor in that beforeit.' Ah, if thou couldst see when the evildoers are stationed before theirLord, bandying argument the one against the other!  Those that were abasedwill say to those that waxed proud, `Had it not been for you, we would havebeen believers.'
%432% 32.Those that waxed proud will say to those that were abased, `What, did we baryou from the guidance after it came to you?  Nay, rather you were sinners.'
33.And those that were abased will say to those that waxed proud, `Nay, butdevising night and day, when you were ordering us to disbelieve in God, andto set up compeers to Him.' They will be secretly remorseful when they seethe chastisement and We put fetters on the necks of the unbelievers; shallthey be recompensed except for what they were doing?
34.We sent no warner into any city except its men who lived at ease said, `Wedisbelieve in the Message you have been sent with.'
35.They also said, `We are more abundant in wealth and children, and we shallnot be chastised.'
36.Say: `My Lord outspreads and straitens His provision to whomsoever He will,but most men do not know it.'
37.It is not your wealth nor your children that shall bring you nigh in nearnessto Us, except for him who believes, and does righteousness; those--thereawaits them the double recompense for that they did, and they shall be in thelofty chambers in security.
38.And those who strive against Our signs to void them--those shall be arraignedinto the chastisement.
39.Say: `My Lord outspreads and straitens His provision to whomsoever He willof His servants; and whatever thing you shall expend, He will replace it.He is the best of providers.'
%433% 40.Upon the day when He shall muster them all together, then He shall say to theangels, `Was it you these were serving?'
41.They shall say, `Glory be to Thee!  Thou art our Protector, apart from them;nay rather, they were serving the jinn; most of them believed in them.'
42.`Therefore today none of you shall have power to profit or hurt another.'And We shall say to the evildoers, `Taste the chastisement of the Fire, whichyou cried lies to!'
43.And when Our signs are recited to them, clear signs, they say, `This isnaught but a man who desires to bar you from that your fathers served'; andthey say, `This is nothing but a forged calumny.' And the unbelievers say tothe truth, when it has come to them, `This is nothing but manifest sorcery.'
44.We have not given them any Books to study, nor have We sent them before theeany warner.
45.Those that were before them also cried lies, yet they reached not a tenth ofwhat We gave them; they cried lies to My Messengers, and how wasMy horror!
46.Say: `I give you but one admonition, that you stand unto God, two by twoand one by one, and then reflect: no madness is in your comrade. He isnaught but a warner unto you, before a terrible chastisement.'
47.Say: `I have asked no wage of you; that shall be yours. My wage falls onlyupon God; and He is witness over everything.'
48.Say: `My Lord hurls the truth--the Knower of the Unseen
%434% 49.Say: `Truth has come; falsehood originates not, nor brings again.'
50.Say: `If I go astray, I go astray only to my own loss; if I am guidedit is by what my Lord reveals to me. He is All-hearing,Ever-nigh.'
51.Ah, if thou couldst see when they are terrified, and there is no escape, andthey are seized from a place near at hand,
52.and they say, `We believe in it'; but how can they reach from a placefar away,
53.seeing they disbelieved in it before, guessing at the Unseen from a placefar away?
54.And a barrier is set between them and that they desire, as was done with thelikes of them aforetime; they were in doubt disquieting.
<35,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Praise belongs to God, Originator of the heavens and earth, who appointed theangels to be messengers having wings two, three and four, increasing creationas He wills. Surely God is powerful over everything.
2.Whatsoever mercy God opens to men, none can withhold and whatsoever Hewithholds, none can loose after Him. He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.
3.O men, remember God's blessing upon you; is there any creator, apart fromGod, who provides for you out of heaven and earth?  There is no god but He:how then are you perverted?
%435% 4.If they cry lies to thee, Messengers before thee were cried lies to; and untoGod all matters are returned.
5.O men, God's promise is true; so let not the present life delude you, and letnot the Deluder delude you concerning God.
6.Surely Satan is an enemy to you; so take him for an enemy. He calls hisparty only that they may be among the inhabitants of the Blaze.
7.Those who disbelieve--there awaits them a terrible chastisement; but thosewho believe, and do deeds of righteousness--theirs shall be forgiveness anda great wage.
8.And what of him, the evil of whose deeds has been decked out fair to him, sothat he thinks it is good?  God leads astray whomsoever He will, andwhomsoever He will He guides; so let not thy soul be wasted in regrets forthem; God has knowledge of the things they work.
9.God is He that looses the winds, that stir up cloud, then We drive it to adead land and therewith revive the earth, after it is dead. Even so is theUprising.
10.Whosoever desires glory, the glory altogether belongs to God. To Him goodwords go up, and the righteous deed--He uplifts it; but those who devise evildeeds--theirs shall be a terrible chastisement, and their devising shall cometo naught.
11.God created you of dust then of a sperm-drop, then He made you pairs. Nofemale bears or brings forth, save with His knowledge; and none is given longlife who is given long life neither is any diminished in his life, but it isin a Book. Surely that is easy for God.
%436% 12.Not equal are the two seas; this is sweet, grateful to taste, delicious todrink, and that is salt, bitter to the tongue. Yet of both you eat freshflesh, and bring forth out of it ornaments for you to wear; and thou mayestsee the ships cleaving through it, that you may seek of His bounty, and sohaplyyou will be thankful.
13.He makes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into thenight, and He has subjected the sun and the moon, each of them running to astated term. That is God, your Lord; to Him belongs the Kingdom; and thoseyou call upon, apart from Him, possess not so much as the skin of adate-stone.
14.If you call upon them, they will not hear your prayer, and if they heard,they would not answer you; and on the Day of Resurrection they will disownyour partnership. None can tell thee like One who is aware.
15.O men, you are the ones that have need of God; He is the All-sufficient, theAll-laudable.
16.If He will, He can put you away and bring a new creation;
17.that is surely no great matter for God.
18.No soul laden bears the load of another; and if one heavy-burdened calls forits load to be carried, not a thing of it will be carried, though he be anear kinsman. Thou warnest only those who fear their Lord in the Unseen andperform the prayer; and whosoever purifies himself, purifies himself only forhis own soul's good. To God is the homecoming.
%437% 19.Not equal are the blind and the seeing man,
20.the shadows and the light,
21.the shade and the torrid heat;
22.not equal are the living and the dead. God makes to hear whomsoever He will;thou canst not make those in their tombs to hear--
23.thou art naught but a warner.
24.Surely We have sent thee with the truth good tidings to bear, and warning;not a nation there is, but there has passed away in it a warner.
25.If they cry thee lies, those before them also cried lies; their Messengerscame to them with the clear signs, the Psalms, the IlluminatingBook;
26.then I seized the unbelievers, and how was My horror!
27.Hast thou not seen how that God sends down out of heaven water, and therewithWe bring forth fruits of diverse hues?  And in the mountains are streakswhite and red, of diverse hues, and pitchy black; men too, and beasts andcattle--diverse are their hues.
28.Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge; surely God isAll-mighty, All-forgiving.
29.Surely those who recite the Book of God and perform the prayer, and expend ofthat We have provided them, secretly and in public, look for a commerce thatcomes not to naught,
30.that He may pay them in full their wages and enrich them of His bounty;surely He is All-forgiving, All-thankful.
%438% 31.And that We have revealed to thee of the Book is the truth, confirming whatis before it; God is aware of and sees His servants.
32.Then We bequeathed the Book on those Our servants We chose ; but of them somewrong themselves, some of them are lukewarm, and some are outstrippers ingood works by the leave of God; that is the great bounty.
33.Gardens of Eden they shall enter; therein they shall be adorned withbracelets of gold and with pearls, and their apparel there shall be of silk.
34.And they shall say, `Praise belongs to God who has put away all sorrow fromus. Surely our Lord is All-forgiving, All-thankful,
35.who of His bounty has made us to dwell in the abode of everlasting lifewherein no weariness assails us neither fatigue.'
36.As for the unbelievers, theirs shall be the fire of Gehenna Hell.; theyshall neither be done with and die, nor shall its chastisement be lightenedfor them. Even so We recompense every ungrateful one.
37.Therein they shall shout, `Our Lord, bring us forth, and we will dorightousness, other than what we have done.'  `What, did We not give youlong life, enough to remember in for him who would remember?  To you thewarner came; so taste you now!  The evildoers shall have no helper.'
38.God knows the Unseen in the heavens and the earth; He knows the thoughtswithin the breasts.
%439% 39.It is He who appointed you viceroys in the earth. So whosoever disbelieves,his unbelief shall be charged against him; their unbelief increases thedisbelievers only in hate in God's sight; their unbelief increases thedisbelievers only in loss.
40.Say: `Have you considered your associates on whom you call, apart from God?Show me what they have created in the earth; or have they a partnership inthe heavens?' Or have We given them a Book, so that they are upon a clearsign from it?  Nay, but the evildoers promise one another naught butdelusion.
41.God holds the heavens and the earth, lest they remove; did they remove, nonewould hold them after Him. Surely He is All-clement, All - forgiving.
42.They have sworn by God the most earnest oaths that if a warner came to them,they would be more rightly guided than any one of the nations; but when awarner came to them, it increased them only in aversion,
43.waxing proud in the land, and devising evil; but evil devising encompassesonly those who do it. So do they expect anything but the wont of theancients?  And thou shalt never find any changing the wont of God, and thoushalt never find any altering the wont of God.
44.What, have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of thosebefore them?  They were stronger than themselves in might; but God--there isnaught in the heavens or the earth that can frustrate Him.Surely He isAll-knowing, All-powerful.
%440% 45.If God should take men to task for what they have earned He would not leaveupon the face of the earth one creature that crawls; but He is deferring themto a stated term. But when their term is come--surely God sees Hisservants.
<36,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ya Sin
2.By the Wise Koran,
3.thou art truly among the Envoys
4.on a straight path;
5.the sending down of the All-mighty, the All-wise,
6.that thou mayest warn a people whose fathers were never warned, so they areheedless.
7.The Word has been realised against most of them, yet they do not believe.
8.Surely We have put on their necks fetters up to the chin, so their heads areraised;
9.and We have put before them a barrier and behind them a barrier; and We havecovered them, so they do not see.
10.Alike it is to them whether thou hast warned them or thou hast not warnedthem, they do not believe.
11.Thou only warnest him who follows the Remembrance and who fears theAll-merciful in the Unseen; so give him the good tidings of forgiveness and agenerous wage.
12.Surely it is We who bring the dead to life and write down what they haveforwarded and what they have left behind; everything We have numbered in aclear register.
%441% 13.Strike for them a similitude--the inhabitants of the city, when the Envoyscame to it;
14.when We sent unto them two men, but they cried them lies, so We sent a thirdas reinforcement.
15.They said, `We are assuredly Envoys unto you.'  They said, `You are naughtbut mortals like us; the All-merciful has not sent down anything. You arespeaking only lies.'
16.They said, `Our Lord knows we are Envoys unto you;
17.and it is only for us to deliver the Manifest Message.'
18.They said, `We augur ill of you. If you give not over, we will stone you andthere shall visit you from us a painful chastisement.'
19.They said, `Your augury is with you; if you are reminded?  But you are aprodigal people.'
20.Then came a man from the furthest part of the city, running; he said, `Mypeople, follow the Envoys!
21.Follow such as ask no wage of you, that are right-guided.
22.And why should I not serve Him who originated me, and unto whom you shall bereturned?
23.What, shall I take, apart from Him, gods whose intercession, if theAll-merciful desires affliction for me, shall not avail me anything, and whowill never deliver me?
24.Surely in that case I should be in manifest error.
25.Behold, I believe in your Lord; therefore hear me!'
26.It was said, `Enter Paradise!' He said, `Ah, would that my people hadknowledge
27.that my Lord has forgiven me and that He has placed me among the honoured.'
%442% 28.And We sent not down upon his people, after him, any host out of heaven;neither would We send any down.
29.It was only one Cry Blast.and lo, they were silent and still.
30.Ah, woe for those servants!  Never comes unto them a Messenger, but they mockat him.
31.What, have they not seen how many generations We have destroyed before them,and that it is not unto them that they return?
32.They shall every one of them be arraigned before Us.
33.And a sign for them is the dead land, that We quickened and brought forthfrom it grain, whereof they eat;
34.and We made therein gardens of palms and vines, and therein We causedfountains to gush forth,
35.that they might eat of its fruits and their hands' labour. What, will theynot be thankful?
36.end 36:35.Glory be to Him, who created all the pairs of what the earth produces, and ofthemselves, and of what they know not.
37.And a sign for them is the night; We strip it of the day and lo, they are indarkness.
38.And the sun--it runs to a fixed resting-place; that is the ordaining of theAll-mighty, the All-knowing.
39.And the moon--We have determined it by stations, till it returns like an agedpalm-bough.
40.It behoves not the sun to overtake the moon, neither does the night outstripthe day, each swimming in a sky.
%443% 41.And a sign for them is that We carried their seed in the laden ship,
42.and We have created for them the like of it whereon they ride43.and if We will, We drown them, then none have they to cry to, neither arethey delivered,
44.save as a mercy from Us, and enjoyment for a while.
45.And when it is said to them, `Fear what is before you and what is behind you;haply you will find mercy'--
46.yet never any sign of the signs of their Lord comes to them, but they areturning away from it.
47.And when it is said to them, `Expend of that God has provided you,' theunbelievers say to the believers, `What, shall we feed such a one whom, ifGod willed, He would feed?  You are only in manifest error!'
48.They also say, `When shall this promise come to pass, if you speak truly?'
49.They are awaiting only for one Cry Blast.to seize them while they are yetdisputing,
50.then they will not be able to make any testament, nor will they return totheir people.
51.And the Trumpet shall be blown; then behold , they are sliding down fromtheir tombs unto their Lord.
52.They say, `Alas for us!  Who roused us out of our sleeping place?  This iswhat the All-merciful promised, and the Envoys spoke truly.'
53.`It was only one Cry; then behold, they are all arraigned before Us.
54.So today no soul shall be wronged anything, and you shall not be recompensed,except according to what you have been doing.
%444% 55.See, the inhabitants of Paradise today are busy in theirrejoicing,
56.they and their spouses, reclining upon couches in the shade;
57.therein they have fruits, and they have all that they call for.
58.`Peace!'--such is the greeting, from a Lord All-compassionate.
59.`Now keep yourselves apart, you sinners, upon this day!
60.Made I not covenant with you, Children of Adam, that you should not serveSatan--surely he is a manifest foe to you--
61.and that you should serve Me?  This is a straight path.
62.He led astray many a throng of you; did you not understand?
63.This is Gehenna Hell., then, the same that you were promised;
64.roast well in it today, for that you were unbelievers!'
65.Today We set a seal on their mouths, and their hands speak to Us, and theirfeet bear witness as to what they have been earning.
66.Did We will, We would have obliterated their eyes, then they would race tothe path, but how would they see?
67.Did We will, We would have changed them where they were, then they could notgo on, nor could they return.
68.And to whomsoever We give long life, We bend him over in His constitution;what, do they not understand?
69.We have not taught him poetry; it is not seemly for him. It is only aRemembrance and a Clear Koran,
70.that he may warn whosoever is living, and that the Word may be realizedagainst the unbelievers.
%445% 71.Have they not seen how that We have created for them of that Our handswrought cattle that they own?
72.We have subdued them to them, and some of them they ride, and some they eat;
73.other uses also they have in them, and beverages. What, will they not bethankful?
74.Yet they have taken, apart from God, gods; haply they might be helped.
75.They cannot help them, though they be hosts made ready for them.
76.So do not let their saying grieve thee; assuredly We know what they keepsecret and what they publish.
77.Has not man regarded how that We created him of a sperm-drop?  Then lo, he isa manifest adversary.
78.And he has struck for Us a similitude and forgotten his creation; he says,`Who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed?'
79.Say: `He shall quicken them, who originated them the first time; He knows allcreation,
80.who has made for you out of the green tree fire and lo, from it youkindle.'
81.Is not He, who created the heavens and earth, able to create the like ofthem?  Yes indeed; He is the All-creator, the All-knowing.
82.His command, when He desires a thing, is to say to it `Be,' and it is.
83.So glory be to Him, in whose hand is the dominion of everything, and untowhom you shall be returned.
%446% <37,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the rangers ranging those ranged in ranks.
2.and the scarers scaring those repelling evil.
3.and the reciters of a Remembrance,
4.surely your God is One,
5.Lord of the heavens and the earth, and of what between them is,Lord of the Easts.
6.We have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the stars
7.and to preserve against every rebel Satan;
8.they listen not to the High Council.
9.for they are pelted from every side,rejected, and theirs is an everlasting chastisement,
10.except such as snatches a fragment, and he is pursued by a piercingflame.
11.So ask them for a pronouncement--Are they stronger in constitution, orthose We created?  We created them of clinging clay.
12.Nay, thou marvellest; and they scoff
13.and, when reminded, do not remember
14.and, when they see a sign, would scoff;
15.and they say, `This is nothing but manifest sorcery.
16.What, when we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we indeedbe raised up?
17.What, and our fathers, the ancients?'
18.Say: `Yes, and in all lowliness.'
19.For it is only a single scaring, then behold, they are watching
20.and they say, `Woe, alas for us!  This is the Day of Doom.'
21.`This is the Day of Decision, even that you cried lies to.
22.Muster those who did evil, their wives, and that they were serving,
23.apart from God, and guide them unto the path of Hell!
24.And halt them, to be questioned:
%447% 25."Why help you not one another?"
26.No indeed; but today they resign themselves in submission
27.and advance one upon another, asking each other questions.
28.These say, `Why, you of old would come to us from the right hand.'
29.Those say, `No; on the contrary, you were not believers;
30.we had no authority over you; no, you were an insolent people.
31.So our Lord's Word is realised against us; we are tasting it.
32.Therefore we perverted you, and we ourselves were perverts.'
33.So all of them on that day are sharers in the chastisement.
34.Even so We do with the sinners; for when it was said to them,
35.`There is no god but God,' they were ever waxing proud,
36.end 37:35.saying, `What, shall we forsake our gods for a poet possessed?'
37.`No indeed; but he brought the truth, and confirmed the Envoys.
38.Now certainly you shall be tasting the painful chastisement,
39.and not be recompensed, except according to what you were doing.'
40.Except for God's sincere servants;
41.end 37:40.for them awaits a known provision,
42.fruits--and they high-honoured
43.in the Gardens of Bliss
44.upon couches, set face to face,
45.a cup from a spring being passed round to them,
46.white, a delight to the drinkers,
47.wherein no sickness is, neither intoxication;
48.and with them wide-eyed maidens restraining their glances
49.as if they were hidden pearls.
50.They advance one upon another, asking each other questions.
51.end 37:50.One of them says, `I had a comrade
%448% 52.who would say, "Are you a confirmer?
53.What, when we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we indeedbe requited?" '
54.He says, `Are you looking down?'
55.Then he looks, and sees him in the midst of Hell.
56.end 37:55.He says, `Be God, wellnigh thou didst destroy me;
57.But for my Lord's blessing, I were one of the arraigned.
58.What, do we then not die
59.except for our first death, and are we not chastised?
60.This is indeed the mighty triumph,
61.and for the like of this let the workers work.'
62.Is that better as a hospitality, or the Tree of Ez-Zakkoum?
63.We have appointed it as a trial for the evildoers.
64.It is a tree that comes forth in the root of Hell;
65.its spathes are as the heads of Satans,
66.and they eat of it, and of it fill their bellies,
67.then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
68.then their return is unto Hell.
69.They found their fathers erring,
70.and they run in their footsteps.
71.Before them erred most of the ancients,
72.and We sent among them warners;
73.and behold, how was the end of them that were warned,
74.except for God's sincere servants.
75.Noah called to Us; and how excellent were the Answerers!
76.And We delivered him and his people from the great distress,
%449% 77.and We made his seed the survivors,
78.and left for him among the later folk
79.`Peace be upon Noah among all beings!'
80.Even so We recompense the good-doers;
81.he was among Our believing servants.
82.Then afterwards We drowned the rest.
83.Of his party was also Abraham;
84.when he came unto his Lord with a pure heart,
85.when he said to his father and his folk, `What do you serve?
86.Is it a calumny, gods apart from God, that you desire?
87.What think you then of the Lord of all Being?'
88.And he cast a glance at the stars,
89.and he said, `Surely I am sick.'
90.But they went away from him, turning their backs.
91.Then he turned to their gods, and said, `What do you eat?
92.What ails you, that you speak not?'
93.And he turned upon them smiting them with his right hand.
94.Then came the others to him hastening.
95.He said, `Do you serve what you hew,
96.and God created you and what you make?'
97.They said, `Build him a building, and cast him into the furnace!'
98.They desired to outwit him; so We made them the lower ones.
99.He said, I am going to my Lord; He will guide me.
100.My Lord, give me one of the righteous.'
101.Then We gave him the good tidings of a prudent boy;
102.and when he had reached the age of running with him,he said, `My son, I see in a dream that I shall sacrifice thee; consider,what thinkest thou?' He said, `My father, do as thou artbidden; thou shalt find me, God willing, one of the steadfast.'
%450% 103.When they had surrendered, and he flung him upon his brow,
104.We called unto him, `Abraham,
105.thou hast confirmed the vision; even so We recompense thegood-doers.
106.This is indeed the manifest trial.'
107.And We ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice,
108.and left for him among the later folk
109.`Peace be upon Abraham!'
110.Even so We recompense the good-doers;
111.he was among Our believing servants.
112.Then We gave him the good tidings of Isaac, a Prophet, one of the righteous.
113.And We blessed him, and Isaac; and of their seed some are good-doers,and some manifest self-wrongers.
114.We also favoured Moses and Aaron,
115.and We delivered them and their people from the great distress.
116.And We helped them,so that they were the victors;
117.and We gave them the Manifesting Book,
118.and guided them in the straight path,
119.and left for them among the later folk
120.`Peace be upon Moses and Aaron!'
121.Even so We recompense the good-doers;
122.they were among Our believing servants.
123.Elias too was one of the Envoys;
124.when he said to his people, `Will you not be godfearing?
125.Do you call on Baal, and abandon the Best of creators?
126.God, your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients?'
%451% 127.But they cried him lies; so they will be among the arraigned,
128.except for God's sincere servants;
129.and We left for him among the later folk
130.`Peace be upon Elias!'
131.Even so We recompense the good-doers;
132.he was among Our believing servants.
133.Lot too was one of the Envoys;
134.when We delivered him and his people all together,
135.save an old woman among those that tarried;
136.then We destroyed the others,
137.and you pass by them in the morning and
138.in the night; will you not understand?
139.Jonah too was one of the Envoys;
140.when he ran away to the laden ship
141.and cast lots, and was of the rebutted,142.then the whale swallowed him down, and he blameworthy.
143.Now had he not been of those that glorify God,
144.he would have tarried in its belly until the day they shall be raised;
145.but We cast him upon the wilderness, and he was sick,
146.and We caused to grow over him a tree of gourds.
147.Then We sent him unto a hundred thousand, or more,
148.and they believed; so We gave them enjoyment for a while.
149.So ask them for a pronouncement--Has thy Lord daughters, and they sons?
150.Or did We create the angels females, while they were witnesses?
151.Is it not of their own calumny that they say,
152.`God has begotten?' They are truly liars.
153.Has He chosen daughters above sons?
%452% 154.What ails you then, how you judge?
155.What, and will you not remember?
156.Or have you a clear authority?
157.Bring your Book, if you speak truly!
158.They have set up a kinship between Him and the jinn;and the jinn know that they shall be arraigned.
159.Glory be to God above that they describe,
160.except for God's sincere servants.
161.But as for you, and that you serve,
162.you shall not tempt any against Him
163.except him who shall roast in Hell.
164.None of us is there, but has a known station;
165.we are the rangers,
166.we are they that give glory.
167.What though they would say,
168.`If only we had had a Reminder from the ancients,
169.then were we God's sincere servants.'
170.But they disbelieved in it; soon they shall know!
171.Already Our Word has preceded to Our servants, the Envoys;
172.assuredly they shall be helped,
173.and Our host--they are the victors.
174.So turn thou from them for a while,
175.and see them; soon they shall see!
176.What, do they seek to hasten Our chastisement?
177.When it lights in their courtyard, how evil will be the morningof them that are warned!
178.So turn thou from them for a while,
179.and see; soon they shall see!
180.Glory be to the Lord, the Lord of Glory, above that theydescribe!
181.And peace be upon the Envoys;
182.and praise belongs to God, the Lord of all Being.
%453% <38,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Sad By the Koran, containing the Remembrance--
2.nay, but the unbelievers glory in their schism.
3.How many a generation We destroyed before them, and they called, but time wasnone to escape.
4.Now they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and theunbelievers say, `This is a lying sorcerer.
5.What, has he made the gods One God?  This is indeed a marvellousthing.'
6.And the Council of them depart, saying `Go!  Be steadfast to your gods; thisis a thing to be desired.
7.We have not heard of this in the last religion; this is surely an invention.
8.What, has the Remembrance been sent down on him out of us all?'  Nay, butthey are in doubt of My Remembrance; nay, they have not yet tastedMy chastisement.
9.Or have they the treasuries of thy Lord's mercy, the All-mighty, theAll-giving?
10.Or is theirs the kingdom of the heavens and earth and of what between themis?  Why, then let them ascend the cords!
11.A very host of parties is routed there!
12.Cried lies before them the people of Noah, and Ad, and Pharaoh, he of thetent-pegs,
13.and Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the men of the Thicket--those werethe parties;
14.not one, that cried not lies to the Messengers, so My retributionwas just.
15.These are only awaiting for a single Cry Blast., to which there is nodelay.
16.They say, `Our Lord, hasten to us our share before the Day of Reckoning.'
%454% 17.Bear patiently what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man ofmight; he was a penitent.
18.With him We subjected the mountains to give glory at evening and sunrise,
19.and the birds, duly mustered, every one to him reverting;
20.We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and speechdecisive.
21.Has the tiding of the dispute come to thee?  When they scaled the Sanctuary,
22.when they entered upon David, and he took fright at them; and they said,`Fear not; two disputants we are--one of us has injured the other; so judgebetween us justly, and transgress not, and guide us to the right path.'
23.`Behold, this my brother has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe. So hesaid, "Give her into my charge"; and he overcame me in the argument.'
24.SUJDAH AYA.@Said he, `Assuredly he has wronged thee in asking for thy ewein addition to his sheep; and indeed many intermixers do injury one againstthe other, save those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness--and howfew they are!'  And David thought that We had only tried him; therefore hesought forgiveness of his Lord, and he fell down, bowing, and he repented.
25.Accordingly We forgave him that, and he has a near place in Our presenceand a fair resort.
26.`David, behold, We have appointed thee a viceroy in the earth, thereforejudge between men justly, and follow not caprice, lest it lead thee astrayfrom the way of God. Surely those who go astray from the way of God--thereawaits them a terrible chastisement, for that they have forgotten the Day ofReckoning.'
%455% 27.We have not created the heavens and earth, and what between them is, forvanity; such is the thought of the unbelievers, wherefore woe unto theunbelievers because of the Fire!
28.Or shall We make those who believe and do righteous deeds as the workers ofcorruption in the earth, or shall We make the godfearing as thetransgressors?
29.A Book We have sent down to thee, Blessed, that men possessed of minds mayponder its signs and so remember.
30.And We gave unto David Solomon; how excellent a servant he was!  He was apenitent.
31.When in the evening were presented to him the standing steeds,
32.he said, `Lo, I have loved the love of good things better than theremembrance of my Lord, until the sun was hidden behind the veil.
33.Return them to me!' And he began to stroke their shanks and necks.
34.Certainly We tried Solomon, and We cast upon his throne a mere body;then he repented.
35.He said, `My Lord, forgive me, and give me a kingdom such as may not befallanyone after me; surely Thou art the All-giver.'
36.So We subjected to him the wind, that ran at his commandment, softly,wherever he might light on,
37.and the Satans, every builder and diver
38.and others also, coupled in fetters:
39.`This is Our gift; bestow or withhold without reckoning.'
40.And he had a near place in Our presence and a fair resort.
41.Remember also Our servant Job; when he called to his Lord, `Behold,Satan has visited me with weariness and chastisement.'
42.`Stamp thy foot!  This is a laving-place cool, and a drink.'
%456% 43.And We gave to him his family, and the like of them with them, as a mercyfrom us, and a reminder unto men possessed of minds;
44.and, `Take in thy hand a bundle of rushes, and strike therewith, and do notfail in thy oath.'  Surely We found him a steadfast man. How excellent aservant he was!  He was a penitent.
45.Remember also Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob--men of might theyand of vision.
46.Assuredly We purified them with a quality most pure, the remembranceof the Abode,
47.and in Our sight they are of the chosen, the excellent.
48.Remember also Our servants Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhul Kifl; each is amongthe excellent.
49.This is a Remembrance; and for the godfearing is a fair resort,
50.Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are open to them,
51.wherein they recline, and wherein they call for fruits abundant, andsweet potions,
52.and with them maidens restraining their glances of equal age.
53.`This is what you were promised for the Day of Reckoning;
54.this is Our provision, unto which there is no end.'
55.All this; but for the insolent awaits and ill resort,
56.Gehenna Hell., wherein they are roasted--an evil cradling!
57.All this; so let them taste it--boiling water and pus,
58.and other torments of the like kind coupled together.
59.`This is a troop rushing in with you; there is no Welcome for them;they shall roast in the Fire.'
60.They say, `No, it is you have no Welcome; you forwarded it for us;how evil a stablishment!'
61.They say, `Our Lord, whoso forwarded this for us, give him a doublechastisement in the Fire!'
%457% 62.They say, `How is it with us, that we do not see men here that wecounted among the wicked?
63.What, did we take them for a laughing-stock?  Or have our eyesswerved away from them?'
64.Surely that is true--the disputing of the inhabitants of the Fire.
65.Say: `I am only a warner. There is not any god butGod,the One, the Omnipotent,
66.Lord of the heavens and earth, and of what between them is,the All-mighty, the All-forgiving.'
67.Say: `It is a mighty tiding
68.from which you are turning away
69.I had no knowledge of the High Council when they disputed.
70.This alone is revealed to me, that I am only a clear warner.'
71.When thy Lord said to the angels, `See, I am creating a mortal of a clay.
72.When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall you down,bowing before him!'
73.Then the angels bowed themselves all together,
74.save Iblis; he waxed proud, and was one of the unbelievers.
75.Said He, `Iblis, what prevented thee to bow thyself before that I createdwith My own hands?  Hast thou waxed proud, or art thou of thelofty ones?'
76.Said he, `I am better than he; Thou createdst me of fire, and him Thoucreatedst of clay.'
77.Said He, `Then go thou forth hence; thou art accursed.
78.Upon thee shall rest My curse, till the Day of Doom.'
79.Said he, `My Lord, respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
80.Said He, `Thou art among the ones that are respited
81.until the day of the known time.'
82.Said he, `Now, by Thy glory, I shall pervert them all together,
83.excepting those Thy servants among them that are sincere.'
%458% 84.Said He, `This is the truth, and the truth I say; I shall assuredly
85.fill Gehenna Hell.with thee, and with whosoever of them follows thee,all together.'
86.Say: `I ask of you no wage for it, neither am I of those who take thingsupon themselves.
87.It is nothing but a reminder unto all beings,
88.and you shall surely know its tiding after a while.'
<39,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The sending down of the Book is from God the All-mighty, the All-wise.
2.We have sent down to thee the Book with the truth; so worship God, making thyreligion His sincerely.
3.Belongs not sincere religion to God?  And those who take protectors, apartfrom Him--`We only serve them that they may bring us nigh in nearness toGod'--surely God shall judge between them touching that whereon they are atvariance. Surely God guides not him who is a liar, unthankful.
4.Had God desired to take to Him a son, He would have chosen whatever He willedof that He has created. Glory be to Him!  He is God, the One, theOmnipotent.
5.He created the heavens and the earth in truth, wrapping night about the day,and wrapping the day about the night; and He has subjected the sun and themoon, each of them running to a stated term. Is not He the All-mighty,the All-forgiving?
%459% 6.He created you of a single soul, then created of like nature.its mate; andHe sent down to you of the cattle eight couples. He creates you in yourmothers' wombs creation after creation in threefold shadows. That then isGod, your Lord; to Him belongs the Kingdom; there is no god but He; so howare you turned about?
7.If you are unthankful, God is independent of you, yet He approves notunthankfulness in His servants; but if you are thankful, He will approve itin you. And no soul laden bears the load of another. Then to your Lordshall you return, and He will tell you what you have been doing. He knowsthe thoughts within the breasts.
8.When some affliction visits a man, he calls upon his Lord, turning to him;then when He confers on him a blessing from Him he forgets that he wascalling to before and sets up compeers to God, to lead astray from His way.Say: `Enjoy thy unbelief a little; thou shalt be among the inhabitants of theFire.'
9.Or is he who is obedient in the watches of the night, bowing himself andstanding, he being afraid of the world to come and hoping for the mercy ofhis Lord...?  Say: "Are they equal--those who know and those who know not?'Only men possessed of minds remember.
10.Say: `My servants who believe, fear your Lord. For those who do good in thisworld good, and God's earth is wide. Surely the patient will be paid theirwages in full without reckoning.'
%460% 11.Say: `I have been commanded to serve God making my religion His sincerely;
12.and I have been commanded to be the first of those that surrender.'
13.Say: `Truly I fear, if I should rebel against my Lord, the chastisementof a dreadful day.'
14.Say: `God I serve, making my religion His sincerely;
15.so serve what you will apart from Him.'  Say: `Surely the losers are they wholose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection; is not thatthe manifest loss?
16.Above them they shall have overshadowings of the Fire, and underneath themovershadowings; that it is wherewith God frightens His servants: "O Myservants, so fear you Me!" '
17.Those who eschew the serving of idols and turn penitent to God, for them isgood tidings!  So give thou good tidings
18.to My servants who give ear to the Word and follow the fairest of it. Thoseare they whom God has guided; those--they are men possessed of minds.
19.He against whom the word of chastisement is realized--shalt thou deliver himout of the Fire?
20.But those who fear their Lord--for them await lofty chambers, above which arebuilt lofty chambers, underneath which rivers flow--God's promise; Godfailsnot the tryst.
21.Hast thou not seen how that God has sent down out of heaven water andthreaded it as springs in the earth, then He brings forth therewith crops ofdiverse hues, then they wither, and thou seest them turning yellow, then Hemakes them broken orts?  Surely in that is a reminder for men possessed ofminds.
%461%22.Is he whose breast God has expanded unto Islam, so he walks in a lightfrom his Lord...?  But woe to those whose hearts are hardened againstthe remembrance of God!  Those are in manifest error.
23.God has sent down the fairest discourse as a Book, consimilar in itsoft-repeated, whereat shiver the skins of those who fear their Lord; thentheir skins and their hearts soften to the remembrance of God. That is God'sguidance, whereby He guides whomsoever He will; and whomsoever God leadsastray, no guide has he.
24.Is he who guards himself with his face against the evil of the chastisementon the Day of Resurrection...?  And it is said to the evildoers, `Taste nowthat you were earning!'
25.Those that were before them cried lies, thenthe chastisement came upon them from whence they were not aware;
26.so God let them taste degradation in this present life; and the chastisementof the world to come is assuredly greater, did they but know.
27.Indeed We have struck for the people in this Koran every manner of similitude ;haply they will remember;
28.an Arabic Koran, wherein there is no crookedness; haply they will begodfearing.
29.God has struck a similitude--a man in whom partners disagreeing share, and aman the property of one man. Are the two equal in likeness?  Praise belongsto God!  Nay, but most of them do not know.
30.Thou art mortal, and they are mortal;
31.then on the Day of Resurrection before your Lord you shall dispute.
%462% 32.But who does greater evil than he who lies against God and cries lies to thevery truth, when it comes to him?  Is there not in Gehenna Hell.a lodgingfor the unbelievers?
33.And he who has come with the very truth and confirms it, those--they are thegodfearing.
34.They shall have whatsoever they will with their Lord; that is the recompenseof the good-doers,
35.that God may acquit them of the worst of what they did, and recompense themwith the wages of the fairest of what they were doing.
36.Shall not God suffice His servant, though they frighten thee with those apartfrom Him?  And whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he.
37.But whomso God guides, none shall lead him astray; is not God All-mighty,All-vengeful?
38.If thou askest them, `Who created the heavens and the earth?' they will say,`God.' Say: `What think you?  That you call upon apart from God--if Goddesires affliction for me, shall they remove His affliction?  Or if Hedesires mercy for me, shall they withhold His mercy?' Say: `God is enough forme; in Him all those put their trust who put their trust.'
39.Say: `My people, act according to your station; I am acting; and soon youwill know
40.to whom will come a chastisement degrading him, and upon whom lights alasting chastisement.'
%463% 41.Surely We have sent down upon thee the Book for mankind with the truth.Whosoever is guided, is only guided to his own gain, and whosoever goesastray, it is only to his own loss; thou art not a guardian over them.
42.God takes the souls at the time of their death, and that which has not died,in its sleep; He withholds that against which He has decreed death, butlooses the other till a stated term. Surely in that are signs for a peoplewho reflect.
43.Or have they taken intercessors apart from God?  Say: `What, even though theyhave no power whatever and no understanding?'
44.Say: `To God belongs intercession altogether. His is the kingdom of theheavens and the earth; then unto Him you will be returned.'
45.When God is mentioned alone, then shudder the hearts of those who believe notin the Hereafter, but when those apart from Him are mentioned behold,they rejoice.
46.Say: `O God, Thou originator of the heavens and the earth who knowest theUnseen and the Visible, Thou shalt judge between Thy servants touching thatwhereon they are at variance.'
47.If the evildoers possessed all that is in the earth, and the like of it withit, they would offer it to ransom themselves from the evil of thechastisement on the Day of Resurrection; yet there would appear to them fromGod that they never reckoned with,
%464% 48.and there would appear to them the evils of that they have earned, and theywould be encompassed by that they mocked at.
49.When some affliction visits a man, he calls unto Us; then, when We confer onhim a blessing from Us, he says, `I was given it only because of aknowledge.' Nay, it is a trial, but most of them do not know it.
50.So said those that were before them; but that they earned did not availthem,
51.in that the evils of that they earned smote them. The evildoers of thesemen, they too shall be smitten by the evils of that they earned; they willnot be able to frustrate it.
52.Do they know that God outspreads and straitens His provision to whomsoever Hewill?  Surely in that are signs for a people who believe.
53.Say: `O my people who have been prodigal against yourselves, do not despairof God's mercy; surely God forgives sins altogether; surely He is theAll-forgiving, the All-compassionate.
54.Turn unto your Lord and surrender to Him, ere the chastisement comes uponyou, then you will not be helped.
55.And follow the fairest of what has been sent down to you from your Lord, erethe chastisement comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware.'
56.Lest any soul should say, `Alas for me, in that I neglected my duty to God,and was a scoffer,'
%456% 57.or lest it should say, `If only God had guided me, I should have beenamong the godfearing,'
58.or lest it should say, when it sees the chastisement, `O that I mightreturn again, and be among the good-doers.'
59.`Yes indeed!  My signs did come to thee, but thou hast cried them lies, andthou hast waxed proud, and become one of the unbelievers.'
60.And upon the Day of Resurrection thou shalt see those who lied against God,their faces blackened; is there not in Gehenna Hell a lodging for thosethat are proud?
61.But God shall deliver those that were godfearing in their security; evilshall not visit them, neither shall they sorrow.
62.God is the Creator of every thing; He is Guardian over every thing;
63.unto Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. And those whodisbelieve in the signs of God, those--they are the losers.
64.Say: `Is it other than God you bid me serve, you ignorant ones?'
65.It has been revealed to thee, and to those before thee, `If thou associatestother gods with God, thy work shall surely fail and thou wilt be among thelosers.'
66.Nay, but God do thou serve; and be thou among the thankful.
67.They measure not God with His true measure. The earth altogether shall beHis handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens shall be rolled up inHis right hand. Glory be to Him!  High be He exalted above that theyassociate!
%466% 68.For the Trumpet shall be blown, and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoeveris in the earth shall swoon, save whom God wills. Then it shall be blownagain, and lo, they shall stand beholding.
69.And the earth shall shine with the light of its Lord, and the Book shall beset in place, and the Prophets and witnesses shall be brought, and justly theissue be decided between them, and they not wronged.
70.Every soul shall be paid in full for what it has wrought; and He knows verywell what they do.
71.Then the unbelievers shall be driven in companies into Gehenna Hell till,when they have come thither, then its gates will be opened and its keeperswill say to them, `Did not Messengers come to you from among yourselves,reciting to you the signs of your Lord and warning you against the encounterof this your day?'  They shall say, `Yes indeed; but the word of thechastisement has been realized against the unbelievers.'
72.It shall be said, `Enter the gates of Gehenna Hell., to dwell thereinforever.' How evil is the lodging of those that are proud !
73.Then those that feared their Lord shall be driven in companies into Paradise,till, when they have come thither, and its gates are opened, and its keeperswill say to them, `Peace be upon you!  Well you have fared; enter in, todwell forever.'
74.And they shall say, `Praise belongs to God, who has been true in His promiseto us, and has bequeathed upon us the earth, for us to make our dwellingwheresoever we will in Paradise.'  How excellent is the wage of those thatlabour!
%467% 75.And thou shalt see the angels encircling about the Throne proclaiming thepraise of their Lord; and justly the issue shall be decided between them; andit shall be said, `Praise belongs to God, the Lord of allBeing.'
<40,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.The sending down of the Book is from God the All-mighty, the All-knowing,
3.Forgiver of sins, Accepter of penitence, Terrible in retribution,the Bountiful; there is no god but He, and unto Him is the homecoming.
4.None but the unbelievers dispute concerning the signs of God; so let nottheir going to and fro in the land delude thee.
5.The people of Noah before them also cried lies, and the parties after them;every nation purposed against their Messenger to seize him, and disputed withfalsehood that they might rebut thereby the truth. Then I seized them; andhow was My retribution!
6.Even so the Word of thy Lord was realised against the unbelievers, that theyare the inhabitants of the Fire.
7.Those who bear the Throne, and those round about it proclaim the praise oftheir Lord, and believe in Him, and they ask forgiveness for those whobelieve: `Our Lord, Thou embracest every thing in mercy and knowledge;therefore forgive those who have repented, and follow Thy way, and guard themagainst the chastisement of Hell.
%468% 8.Our Lord, and admit them to the Gardens of Eden that Thou hast promised themand those who were righteous of their fathers, and their wives, and theirseed; surely Thou art the All-mighty, the All-wise.
9.And guard them against evil deeds; whomsoever Thou guardest against evildeeds on that day, on him Thou hast had mercy; and that is indeed the mightytriumph.
10.It shall be proclaimed to the unbelievers, `Surely God's hatred is greaterthan your hatred one of another, when you were called unto belief, anddisbelieved.'
11.They shall say, `Our Lord, Thou hast caused us to die two deaths and Thouhast given us twice to live; now we confess our sins. Is there any way to goforth?'
12.That is because, when God was called to alone, you disbelieved; but if othersare associated with Him, then you believe. Judgment belongs to God, theAll-high, the All-great.
13.It is He who shows you His signs and sends down to you out of heavenprovision; yet none remembers but he who repents.
14.So call unto God, making your religion His sincerely, though the unbelieversbe averse.
15.Exalter of ranks is He, Possessor of the Throne, casting the Spirit of Hisbidding upon whomever He will of His servants, that he may warn them of theDay of Encounter,
16.the day sally forth, and naught of theirs is hidden from God. `Whose is theKingdom today?' `God's, the One, the Omnipotent.
%469% 17.Today each soul shall be recompensed for that it has earned; no wrong today.Surely God is swift at the reckoning.'
18.And warn them against the Day of the Imminent when, choking with anguish, thehearts are in the throats and the evildoers have not one loyal friend, nointercessor to be heeded.
19.He knows the treachery of the eyes and what the breasts conceal.
20.God shall decide justly, and those they call on, apart from Him, shall notdecide by any means. Surely God is the All-hearing,the All-seeing.
21.What, have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of thosebefore them?  They were stronger than themselves in might and left firmertraces in the earth; yet God seized them in their sins, and they had none todefend them from God.
22.That was because their Messengers came to them with the clear signs; but theydisbelieved, so God seized them. Surely He is All-strong, terrible inretribution.
23.We also sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority,
24.to Pharaoh, Haman and Korah; they said, `A lying sorcerer!'
25.And when he brought them the truth from Us, they said, `Slay the sons ofthose who believe with him, and spare their women.' But the guile of theunbelievers is ever in error.
%470% 26.And Pharaoh said, `Let me slay Moses, and let him call to his Lord.I fearthat he may change your religion, or that he may cause corruption to appearin the land.'
27.And Moses said, `I take refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every man who isproud, and believes not in the Day of Reckoning.'
28.Then said a certain man, a believer of Pharaoh's folk that kept hidden hisbelief, `What, will you slay a man because he says, "My Lord is God," yet hehas brought you the clear signs from your Lord?  If he is a liar, his lyingis upon his own head; but if he is truthful, somewhat of that he promises youwill smite you. Surely God guides not him who is prodigal and a liar.
29.O my people, today the kingdom is yours, who are masters in the land. Butwho will help us against the might of God, if it comes upon us?' SaidPharaoh, `I only let you see what I see; I only guide you in the way ofrectitude.'
30.Then said he who believed, `My people, truly I fear for you the like of theday of the parties,
31.the like of the case of Noah's people, Ad, Thamood, and those after them; andGod desires not wrong for His servants.
32.O my people, I fear for you the Day of Invocation,
33.the day you turn about, retreating, having none to defend you from God;and whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he.
%471% 34.Joseph brought you the clear signs before, yet you continued in doubtconcerning that he brought you until, when he perished, you said, "God willnever send forth a Messenger after him."  Even so God leads astray theprodigal and the doubter.'
35.Those who dispute concerning the signs of God, without any authority come tothem, very hateful is that in the sight of God and the believers; so God setsa seal on every heart proud, arrogant.
36.Pharaoh said, `Haman, build for me a tower, that haply so I may reachthe cords,
37.the cords of the heavens, and look upon Moses' God; for I think that he isa liar.`So the evil of his deeds was decked out fair to Pharaoh, and he wasbarred from the way, and Pharaoh's guile came only to ruin.
38.Then said he who believed, `My people, follow me, and I will guide you in theway of rectitude.
39.O my people, surely this present life is but a passing enjoyment; surelythe world to come is the abode of stability.
40.Whosoever does and evil deed shall be recompensed only with the like of it,but whosoever does a righteous deed, be it male or female, believing--thoseshall enter Paradise, therein provided without reckoning.
%472% 41.O my people, how is it with me, that I call you to salvation , and you callme to the Fire?
42.You call me to disbelieve in God, and to associate with Him that whereof Ihave no knowledge, while I call you to the All-mighty, the All-forgiving.
43.No doubt that what you call me to has no call heard, in this world or in theworld to come, that to God we return, and that the prodigal are theinhabitants of the Fire.
44.You will remember what I say to you. I commit my affair to God; surely Godsees His servants.'
45.So God guarded him against the evil things of their devising, and thereencompassed the folk of Pharaoh the evil chastisement,
46.the Fire, to which they shall be exposed morning and evening; and on the daywhen the Hour is come: `Admit the folk of Pharaoh into the most terriblechastisement!'
47.And when they argue one with the other in the Fire, and the weak say untothose who waxed proud, `Why, we were your followers; will you avail us nowagainst any part of the Fire?'
48.Then those who waxed proud shall say, `Every one of us is in it; indeed, Godalready has passed judgment between His servants.'
49.And those who are in the Fire will say to the keepers of Gehenna Hell.,`Call on your Lord, to lighten for us one day of the chastisement!'
%473% 50.They shall say, `Did not your Messengers bring you the clear signs?'  Theyshall say, `Yes indeed.' They shallsay, `Then do you call!'  But the callingof the unbelievers in only in error.
51.Surely We shall help Our Messengers and those who have believed, in thepresent life, and upon the day when the witnesses arise,
52.upon the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers, and theirsshall be the curse, and theirs the evil abode.
53.We also gave Moses the guidance, and We bequeathed upon the Childrenof Israel the Book
54.for a guidance and for a reminder to men possessed of minds.
55.So be thou patient; Surely God's promise is true. And ask forgiveness forthy sin, and Proclaim the praise of thy Lord at evening anddawn.
56.Those who dispute concerning the signs of God, without any authoritycome to them, in their breasts is only pride, that they shall never attain.So seek thou refuge in God; Surely He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.
57.Certainly the creation of the heavens and earth is greater than the creationof men; but most men know it not.
58.Not equal are the blind and the seeing man, those who believe and do deeds ofrighteousness, and the wrongdoer. Little do you reflect.
%474% 59.The Hour is coming, no doubt of it, but most men do not believe.
60.Your Lord has said, `Call upon Me and I will answer you. Surely thosewho wax too proud to do Me service shall enter Gehenna Hell utterlyabject.'
61.It is God who made for you the night, to repose in it, and the day, to see.Surely God is bountiful to men, but most men are not thankful.
62.That then is God, your Lord, the Creator of everything; there is no god butHe. How then are you perverted?
63.Even so perverted are they who deny the signs of God.
64.It is God who made for you the earth a fixed place and heaven for an edifice;And He shaped you, and shaped you well, and provided you with the goodthings. That then is God, your Lord, so blessed be God, the Lord of allBeing.
65.He is the Living One; there is no god but He. So call upon Him, making yourreligion His sincerely. Praise belongs to God, the Lord of allBeing.
66.Say: `I am forbidden to serve those you call on apart from God since theclear signs came to me from my Lord; and I am commanded to surrender to theLord of all Being.'
%475% 67.It is He who created you of dust then of a sperm-drop, then of a blood-clot,then He delivers you as infants, then that you may come of age, then that youmay be old men--though some of you there are who die before it--and that youmay reach a stated term; haply you will understand.
68.It is He who gives life, and makes to die; and when He decrees a thing, Hebut says to it `Be,' and it is.
69.Hast thou not regarded those who dispute concerning the signs of God, howthey are turned about?
70.Those who cry lies to the Book and that wherewith We sent Our Messengers--soon they will know!
71.When the fetters and chains are on their necks, and they dragged
72.into the boiling water, then into the Fire they are poured;
73.then it is said to them, `Where are those you associated,
74.apart from God?'  They shall say, `They have gone astray from us; nay, but itwas nothing atall that we called upon aforetime.'  Even so God leads astraythe unbelievers.
75.`That is because you rejoiced in the earth without right, and wereexultant.
76.Enter the gates of Gehenna Hell., to dwell therein forever.`How evil is thelodging of those that are proud!
77.So be thou patient; surely God's promise is true. Whether We show thee apart of that We promise them, or We call thee unto Us, to Us they shall bereturned.
%476% 78.We sent Messengers before thee; of some We have related to thee, and some Wehave not related to thee. It was not for any Messenger to bring a sign, saveby God's leave. When God's command comes, justly the issue shall be decided;then the vain-doers shall be lost.
79.It is God who appointed for you the cattle, some of them to ride and of someyou eat;
80.other uses also you have in them; and that on them you may attain a need inyour breasts and upon them and on the ships you are carried.
81.And He shows you His signs; then which of God's signs do you reject?
82.What, have theynot journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of thosebefore them?  They were stronger than themselves in might and left firmertraces in the earth; yet that they earned did not avail them.
83.So, when their Messengers brought them the clear signs, they rejoiced in whatknowledge they had, and were encompassed by that they mocked at.
84.Then, when they saw Our might, they said, `We believe in god alone, and wedisbelieve in that we were associating with Him.'
85.But their belief when they saw Our might did not profit them--the wont of God,as in the past, touching His servants; then the unbelievers shall be lost.
%477% <41,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.A sending down from the Merciful, the Compassionate.
3.A Book whose signs have been distinguished as an Arabic Koran for a peoplehaving knowledge,
4.good tidings to bear, and warning, but most of them have turned away, and donot give ear.
5.They say, `Our hearts are veiled from what thou callest us to, and in our earsis a heaviness, and between us and thee there is a veil; so act; we areacting!'
6.Say: `I am only a mortal, like you are. To me it has been revealed that yourGod is One God; so go straight with Him, and ask for His forgiveness; and woeto the idolaters
7.who pay not the alms, and disbelieve in the world to come.
8.Surely those who believe, and do righteous deeds shall have a wageunfailing.'
9.Say: `What, do you disbelieve in Him who created the earth in two days, anddo you set up compeers to Him?  That is the Lord of all Being.
10.And He set therein firm mountains over it, and He blessed it, and He ordainedtherein its diverse sustenance in four days, equal to those whoask.
11.Then He lifted Himself to heaven when it was smoke, and said to it and to theearth, "Come willingly, or unwillingly!"  They said, "We come willingly."
%478% 12.So He determined them as seven heavens in two days, and revealed itscommandment in every heaven.'  And We adorned the lower heaven with lamps,and to preserve; that is the ordaining of the All-mighty, the All-knowing.
13.But if they turn away, then say, `I warn you of a thunderbolt like to thethunderbolt of Ad and Thamood.'
14.When the Messengers came unto them from before them and from behind them,saying, `Serve none but God,' they said, `Had our Lord willed, surely Hewould have sent down angels; so we disbelieve in the Message you were sentwith.'
15.As for Ad, they waxed proud in the earth without right, and they said, `Whois stronger than we in might?' What, did they not see that God, who createdthem, was stronger than they in might?  And they denied Oursigns.
16.Then We loosed against them a wind clamorous in days of ill fortune, thatWe might let them taste the chastisement of degradation in the present life;and the chastisement of the world to come is even more degrading, and theyshall not be helped.
17.As for Thamood, We guided them, but they preferred blindness above guidance,so the thunderbolt of the chastisement of humiliation seized them for thatthey were earning.
18.AndWe delivered those who believed and were godfearing.
19.Upon the day when God's enemies are mustered to the Fire, duly disposed,
20.till when they are come to it, their hearing, their eyes and their skinsbear witness against them concerning what they have been doing,
%479% 21.and they will say to their skins, `Why bore you witness against us?'  Theyshall say, `God gave us speech, as He gave everything speech. He created youthe first time, and unto Him you shall be returned.
22.Not so did you cover yourselves, that your hearing, your eyes and your skinsshould not bear witness against you; but you thought that God would neverknow much of the things that you were working.
23.That then, the thought you thought about your Lord, has destroyed you, andtherefore you find yourselves this morning among the losers.'
24.Then if they persist, the Fire shall be a lodging for them; and if they askamends yet no amends shall be made to them.
25.We have allotted them comrades, and they have decked out fair to them thatwhich is before them and behind them. So against them has been realized theWord concerning nations that passed away before them, men and jinn alike;surely they were losers.
26.The unbelievers say, `Do not give ear to this Koran, and talk idly about it;haply you will overcome.'
27.So We shall let the unbelievers taste a terrible chastisement, and shallrecompense them with the worst of what they were working.
28.That is the recompense of God's enemies--the Fire, wherein they shall havethe Abode of Eternity as a recompense, for that they denied Our signs.
29.And the unbelievers shall say, `Our Lord, show us those that led us astray,both jinn and men, and we shall set them underneath our feet, that they maybe among the lower ones.'
%480% 30.Those who have said, `Our Lord is God.' then have gone straight, upon themthe angels descend, saying, `Fear not, neither sorrow; rejoice in Paradisethat you were promised.
31. We are your friends in the present life and in the world to come; therein youshall have all that your souls desire, all that you call for,
32.as hospitality from One All-forgiving, One All-compassionate.'
33.And who speaks fairer than he who calls unto God and does righteousness andsays, `Surely I am of them that surrender."]
34.Not equal are the good deed and the evil deed. Repel with that which isfairer and behold, he between whom and thee there is enmity shall be as if hewere a loyal friend.
35.Yet none shall receive it, except the steadfast; none shall receive it,except a man of mighty fortune.
36. If a provocation from Satan should provoke thee, seek refuge in God; He isthe All-hearing, the All-knowing.
37.And of His signs are the night and the day, the sun and the moon. Bow notyourselves to the sun and moon, but bow yourselves to God who created them,if Him you serve.
38.SUJDAH AYA. @And if they wax proud, yet those who are with they Lord doglorify Him by night and day, and grow not weary.
%481% 39.And of His signs is that thou seest the earth humble; then, when We send downwater upon it, it quivers, and swells. Surely He who quickens it is He whoquickens the dead; surely He is powerful over everything.
40.Those who blaspheme Our signs are not hidden from Us. What, is he who shallbe cast into the Fire better, or he who comes on the Day of Resurrection insecurity?  Do what you will; surely He sees the things you do.
41. Those who disbelieve in the Remembrance when it comes to them--and surely itis a Book sublime
42.falsehood comes not to it from before it nor from behind it; a sending downfrom One All-wise, All-laudable.
43.Naught is said to thee but what already was said to the Messengers beforethee. Surely they Lord is a Lord of forgiveness and of painful retribution.
44.If We has made it a barbarous Koran, they would have said, `Why are its signsnot distinguished?  What, barbarous and Arabic?' Say: `To the believers it isa guidance, and a healing; but those who believe not, in their ears is aheaviness, and to them it is a blindness; those--they are called from a farplace.'
45.And We gave Mosesthe Book; and there was difference concerning it, and butfor a Word that preceded from they Lord, it had been decided between them andthey are in doubt of it disquieting.
46. Whoso does righteousness, it is to his own gain, and whoso does evil, it isto his own loss. Thy Lord wrongs not His servants.
%482% 47.To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour. Not a fruit comes forth fromits sheath, no female bears or brings forth, save with His knowledge. Uponthe day when He shall call to them, `Where now are My associates?' they shallsay, `We proclaim to Thee, there is not a witness among us.'
48.Then that they called upon before will go astray from them and they willthink that they have no asylum.
49.Man wearies not of praying for good; but when evil visits him, then he iscast down and desperate.
50.And if We let him taste mercy from Us after hardship that has visited him,he surely says,' This is mine; I think not the Hour is coming.If I amreturned to my Lord, surely the reward most fair with Him will be mine.'Then We shall tell the unbelievers the things they have done, and assuredlyWe shall let them taste a harsh chastisement.
51. And when We bless man, he turns away and withdraws aside; but when evilvisits him, he is full of endless prayers.
52.Say: `What think you?  If it is from God, then you disbelieve in it, who isfurther astray than he who is in wide schism?'
53.We shall show them Our signs in the horizons and in themselves, till it isclear to them that it is the truth.Suffices it not as to thy Lord, that Heis witness over everything?
54.Are they not in doubt touching the encounter with their Lord?  Does He notencompass everything?
%483% <42,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.Ain Sin Qaf
3.So reveals to thee, and to those before thee, God, the All-mighty, theAll-wise.
4.To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth;and He is the All-high, the All-glorious.
5.The heavens wellnigh are rent above them, when the angels proclaim the praiseof their Lord, and ask forgiveness for those on earth. Surely God--He is theAll-forgiving, the All-compassionate.
6. And those who have taken to them protectors apart from Him--God is Wardenover them; thou art not a guardian over them.
7.And so We have revealed to thee an Arabic Koran, that thou mayest warn theMother of Cities and those who dwell about it, and that thou mayest warn ofthe Day of Gathering, wherein is no doubt--a party in Paradise, and a partyin the Blaze.
8.If God had willed, He would have made them one nation; but He admitswhomsoever He will into His mercy, and the evildoers shall have neitherprotector nor helper.
9.Or have they taken to them protectors apart from Him?  But God--He is theProtector; He quickens the dead, and He is powerful over everything.
10.And whatever you are at variance on, the judgment thereof belongs to God.That then is God, my Lord; in Him I have put my trust, and to HimI turn, penitent.
%484% 11. The Originator of the heavens and the earth; He has appointed for you, ofyourselves, pairs, and pairs also of the cattle, therein multiplying you.Like Him there is naught; He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.
12.To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He outspreads andstraitens His provision to whom He will; surely He has knowledge ofeverything.
13.He has laid down for you as religion that He charged Noah with, and thatWe have revealed to thee, and that We charged Abraham with, Moses and Jesus:`Perform the religion, and scatter not regarding it.' Very hateful is thatfor the idolaters, that thou callest them to. God chooses unto Himselfwhomsoever He will, and He guides to Himself whosoever turns, penitent.
14.They scattered not, save after knowledge had come to them, being insolentone to another; and but for a Word that preceded from thy Lord until astated term, it had been decided between them. But those to whom the Bookhas been given as an inheritance after them, behold, they are in doubtof it disquieting.
15.Therefore call thou, and go straight as thou hastbeen commanded; do notfollow their caprices. And say: `I believe in whatever Book God has sentdown; I have been commanded to be just between you. God is our Lord and yourLord. We have our deeds, and you have your deeds; there is no argumentbetween us and you; God shall bring us together, and unto Him is thehomecoming.'
%485% 16. And those who argue concerning God after that answer has been made to Him,their argument is null and void in the sight of their Lord; anger shall restupon them, and there awaits them a terrible chastisement.
17.God it is who has sent down the Book with the truth, and also the Balance.And what shall make thee know?  Haply the Hour is nigh.
18.Those that believe not therein seek to hasten it; but those who believe in itgo in fear of it, knowing that it is the truth. Why, surely those who arein doubt concerning the Hour are indeed in far error.
19.God is All-gentle to His servants, providing for whomsoever He will.He is the All-strong, the All-mighty.
20.Whoso desires the tillageof the world to come, We shall give him increasein his tillage; and whoso desires the tillage of this world, We shall givehim of it, but in the world to come he will have no share.
21. Or have they associates who have laid down for them as religion that forwhich God gave not leave?  But for the Word of Decision, it had been decidedbetween them. For the evildoers there awaits a painful chastisement.
22.Thou seest the evildoers going in fear of that they have earned, that isabout to fall on them; but those who believe and do righteous deeds are inMeadows of the Gardens; whatsoever they will they shall have with their Lord;that is the great bounty.
%486% 23.That is the good tidings God gives to His servants who believe and dorighteous deeds. Say: `I do not ask of you a wage for this, except love forthe kinsfolk; and whosoever gains a good deed, We shall give him increase ofgood in respect of it. Surely God is All-forgiving, All-thankful.'
24.Or do they say, `He has forged against God a lie?' But if God wills, Hewill set a seal on thy heart; and God blots out falsehood and verifies thetruth by His words; He knows the thoughts within the breasts.
25.It is He who accepts repentance from Him servants, and pardons evil deeds; Heknows the things you do.
26.And He answers those who believe and do righteous deeds, and He gives themincrease of His bounty. And the unbelievers--for them awaits a terriblechastisement.
27.Had God expanded His provision to His servants, they would have been insolentin the earth; but He sends down in measure whatsoever He will; surely He isaware of and sees His servants.
28.And it is He who sends down the rain after they have despaired, and Heunfolds His mercy; He is the Protector, the All-laudable.
29.And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and the crawlingthings He has scattered abroad in them; and He is able to gather themwhenever He will.
30.Whatever affliction may visit you is for what your own hands have earned; andHe pardons much.
31.You are not able to frustrate Him in the earth; and, apart from God, you haveneither protector nor helper.
%487% 32.And of His signs are the ships that run on the sea like landmarks;
33.and if He wills, He stills the wind, and they remain motionless on its back.Surely in that are signs for every man enduring, thankful.
34.Or He wrecks them for what they have earned; and He pardons much;
35.and that those who dispute concerning Our signs may know they have noasylum.
36. Whatever thing you have been given is the enjoyment of the present life; butwhat is with God is better and more enduring for those who believe and puttheir trust in their Lord.
37.And those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angryforgive,
38.and those who answer their Lord, and perform the prayer, their affair beingcounsel between them, and they expend of that We have provided them,
39.and who, when insolence visits them, do help themselves--
40.and the recompense of evil is evil the like of it; but whoso pardons and putsthings right, his wage falls upon God; surely He loves not theevildoers.
41. And whosoever helps himself after he has been wronged--against themthere is no way.
42.The way is only open against those who do wrong to the people, and areinsolent in the earth wrongfully; there awaits them a painful chastisement.
43.But surely he who bears patiently and is forgiving--surely that istrue constancy.
44.Whomsoever God leads astray, he has no protector after him; and thou shaltsee the evildoers, when they see the chastisement, saying, `Is there any wayto be sent back?'
%488% 45.And thou shalt see them, as they are exposed to it, abject in humbleness,looking with furtive glance; and the believers shall say, `Surely the losersare they who lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection;surely the evildoers are in lasting chastisement.
46. They have no protectors to help them, apart from God, and whomsoever Godleads astray, no way has he.'
47.Answer your Lord, before there comes a day from God that cannot be turnedback; upon that day you shall have no shelter, no denial.
48.But if they turn away, We sent thee not to be a guardian over them.It isfor thee only to deliver the Message. And when We let man taste mercy fromUs, he rejoices in it; but if some evil befalls him for that his own handshave forwarded, then surely man is unthankful.
49.To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He creates what Hewill; He gives to whom He will females, and He gives to whom He will males
50.or He couples them, both males and females; and He makes whom He will barren.Surely He is All-knowing, All-powerful.
51. It belongs not to any mortal that God should speak to him, except byrevelation, or from behind a veil, or that He should send a messenger and hereveal whatsoever He will, by His leave; surely He is All-high, All-wise.
%489% 52.Even so We have revealed to thee a Spirit of Our bidding. Thou knewestnot what the Book was, nor belief; but We made it a light, whereby Weguide whom We will of Our servants. And thou, surely thoushalt guide unto astraight path--
53.the path of God, to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens, and whatsoeveris in the earth. Surely unto God all things come home.
<43,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.By the Clear Book,
3.behold, We have made it an Arabic Koran; haply you will understand;
4.and behold, it is in the Essence of the Book, with Us; sublime indeed, wise.
5.Shall We turn away the Remembrance from you, for that you are a prodigalpeople?
6. How many a Prophet We sent among the ancients,
7.but not a Prophet came to them, without they mocked at him;
8.so We destroyed men stronger in valour than they, and the example of theancients passed away.
9.If thou askest them, `Who created the heavens and earth?' they will say,`The All-mighty, the All-knowing created them.'
10.He who appointed the earth to be a cradle for you, and appointed ways for youtherein, that haply you may be guided;
%490% 11. and who sent down out of heaven water in measure; and We revived therebya land that was dead; even so you shall be brought forth;
12.and who created the pairs, all of them, and appointed for you ships andcattle such as you ride,
13.that you may be seated on their backs and then remember your Lord's blessingwhen you are seated on them, and say, `Glory be to Him, who has subjectedthis to us, and we ourselves were not equal to it;
14.surely unto our Lord we are turning.'
15.Yet they have assigned to Him a part of His own servants!  Man is clearlyunthankful.
16. Or has He taken to Himself, from that He creates, daughters, and favoured youwith sons?
17.And when any of them is given the good tidings of that he has likened to theAll-merciful, his face is darkened, and he chokes inwardly.
18.What, one who is reared amid ornaments and, when the time of altercationcomes, is not to be seen?
19.And they have made the angels, who are themselves servants of theAll-merciful, females. What, did they witness their creation?  Their witnessshall be written down, and they shall be questioned.
20.They say, `Had the All-merciful so willed, we would not have served them.'They have no knowledge of that; they are only conjecturing.
21.Or did We bring them a Book aforetime to which they hold?
22.Nay, but they say, `We found our fathers upon a community, and we are guidedupon their traces.'
%491% 23.Even so We sent never before thee any warner into any city, except that itsmen who lived at ease said, `We indeed found our fathers upon a community,and we are following upon their traces.'
24.Say: `What, though I should bring you a better guidance than you found yourfathers upon?' They say, `We disbelieve in that you were sent with.'
25.So We took vengeance upon them; and behold how was the end of them that criedlies.
26.And when Abraham said to his father and his people, `Surely I am quit ofthat you serve,
27.except Him who originated me; and He will guide me.'
28.And he made it a word enduring among his posterity; haply so they wouldreturn.
29.Nay, but I gave these and their fathers enjoyment of days, until the truthcame unto them, and a manifest Messenger.
30.And when the truth came to them, they said, `This is a sorcery, and in itwe are unbelievers.'
31.They say, `Why was this Koran not sent down upon some man of moment in thetwo cities?'
32.What, is it they who divide the mercy of thy Lord?  We have divided betweenthem their livelihood in the present life, and raised some of them aboveothers in rank, that some of them may take others in servitude; and themercy of thy Lord is better than that they amass.
33.And were it not that mankind would be one nation, We would have appointed forthose who disbelieve in the All-merciful roofs of silver to their houses, andstairs whereon to mount,
%492% 34.and doors to their houses, and couches whereon to recline,
35.and ornaments; surely all this is but the enjoyment of the present life,and the world to come with thy Lord is for the godfearing.
36. Whoso blinds himself to the Remembrance of the All-merciful, to him We assigna Satan for comrade;
37.and they bar them from the way, and they think they are guided,
38.till, when he comes to Us, he says, `Would there had been between me andthee the distance of the two Easts!' An evil comrade!
39.It shall not profit you today, since you did evil, that you are partners inthe chastisement.
40.What, shalt thou make the deaf to hear, or shalt thou guide the blindand him who is in manifest error?
41. Whether We take thee away, We shall take vengeance upon them,
42.or We show thee a part of that We promised them, surely We have power overthem.
43.So hold thou fast unto that which has been revealed unto thee; surely thouart upon a straight path.
44.Surely it is a Reminder to thee and to thy people; and assuredly you will bequestioned.
45.Ask those of Our Messengers We sent before thee: Have We appointed, apartfrom the All-merciful, gods to be served?
46. We also sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council, and he said,`Surely I am the Messenger of the Lord of all Being.'
47.But when he brought them Our signs, lo, they laughed at them.
%493% 48.And not a sign We showed them, but it was greater than its sister sign;and We seized them with chastisement, that haply they should return.
49.And they said, `Sorcerer, pray to thy Lord for us by the covenant He hasmade with thee, and surely we shall be right-guided.'
50.But when We removed from them the chastisement, behold, they broketheir troth.
51. And Pharaoh proclaimed among his people: `O my people, do I not possess thekingdom of Egypt, and these rivers flowing beneath me?  What, do you notsee?
52.Or am I better than this man, who is contemptible and scarcely makes thingsclear?
53.Why then have bracelets of gold not been cast on him, or angels not comewith him conjoined?'
54.So he made his people unsteady, and they obeyed him; surely they were anungodly people.
55.So, when they had angered Us, We took vengeance on them, and We drowned themall together;
56. and We made them a thing past, and We appointed them for an exampleto later folk.
57.And when the son of Mary is cited as an example, behold, thy people turn awayfrom it
58.and say, `What, are our gods better, or he?' They cite not him to thee, saveto dispute; nay, but they are a people contentious.
59.He is only a servant We blessed, and We made him to be an example to theChildren of Israel.
60.Had We willed, We would have appointed angels among you to be successors inthe earth.
%494% 61. It is knowledge of the Hour; doubt not concerning it, and follow me. This isa straight path.
62.Let not Satan bar you; he is for you a manifest foe.
63.And when Jesus came with the clear signs he said, `I have come to you withwisdom, and that I may make clear to you some of that whereon you are atvariance; so fear you God and obey you me.
64.Assuredly God is my Lord and your Lord; therefore serve Him; this isa straight path.'
65.But the parties among them fell into variance; so woe unto those who didevil, because of the chastisement of a painful day.
66. Are they looking for aught but the Hour, that it shall come upon themsuddenly, when they are not aware?
67.Friends on that day shall be foes to one another, but the god-fearing--
68.`O My servants, today no fear is on you, neither do you sorrow'--
69.even those who believed in Our signs, and had surrendered themselves:
70.`Enter Paradise, you and your wives, walking with joy!'
71. There shall be passed around them platters of gold, and cups, therein beingwhatever the souls desire, and the eyes delight in. `And therein you shalldwell forever.
72.This is the Paradise that you have been given for an in heritance for thethings that you were doing.
73.Therein you have abundant fruits, whereof you may eat.'
%495% 74.But the evildoers dwell forever in the chastisement of Gehenna Hell.
75.that is not abated for them and therein they are sorecon-founded.
76.We never wronged them, but they themselves did the wrong.
77.And they shall call, `O Malik, let thy Lord have done with us!' He will say,`You will surely tarry.'
78.`We brought you the truth, but most of you were averse to the truth.'
79.Or have they contrived some matter?  We too are contriving.
80.Or do they think We hear not their secret and what they conspire together?Yes indeed, and Our messengers are present with them writing itdown.
81. Say: `If the All-merciful has a son, then I am the first to serve him.
82.Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne,above that they describe.'
83.Then leave them alone to plunge and play, until they encounter that day oftheirs which they are promised.
84.And it is He who in heaven is God and in earth is God; He is the All-wise,the All-knowing.
85.Glory be to Him, to whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earthand all that between them is; with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and toHim you shall be returned.
86. Those they call upon, apart from Him, have no power of intercession, savesuch as have testified to the truth, and that knowingly.
87.If thou askest them, `Who created you?' they will say, `God.'  How then arethey perverted?
88.And for his saying, `My Lord,surely these are a people who believe not'--
89.yet pardon them, and say, `Peace!' Soon they will know.
%496% <44,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.By the Clear Book.
3.We have sent it down in a blessed night: We are ever warning
4.therein every wise bidding determined
5.as a bidding from Us, We are ever sending
6. as a mercy from thy Lord.Surely He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing
7.Lord of the heavens and earth, and all that between them is,if you have faith.
8.There is no god but He; He gives life and makes to die;your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients.
9.Nay, but they are in doubt, playing.
10.So be on the watch for a day when heaven shall bring a manifestsmoke
11. covering the people; this is a painful chastisement.
12.`O our Lord, remove Thou from us the chastisement; we are believers.'
13.How should they have the Reminder, seeing a clear Messenger already came tothem,
14.then they turned away from him and said, `A man tutored, possessed!'
15.`Behold, We are removing the chastisement a little; behold, yourevert!'
16. Upon the day when We shall assault most mightily, then We shall take Ourvengeance.
17.Already before them We tried the people of Pharaoh, and a noble Messengercame unto them,
18.saying, `Deliver to me God's servants; I am for you a faithful Messenger,'
%497% 19.and, `Rise not up against God; behold, I come to you with a clear authority,
20.and I take refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you should stoneme.
21. But if so be that you believe me not, go you apart from me!'
22.And he called to his Lord, saying, `These are a sinful people.'
23.`Then set thou forth with My servants in a watch of the night; surely youwill be followed.
24.And leave the sea becalmed; they are a drowned host.'
25.They left how many gardens and fountains,
26. sown fields, and how noble a station,
27.and what prosperity they had rejoiced in!
28.Even so; and We bequeathed them upon another people.
29.Neither heaven nor earth wept for them, nor were they respited;
30.and We delivered the Children of Israel from the humblingchastisement,
31. from Pharaoh; surely he was a high one, of the prodigals;
32.and We chose them, out of a knowledge, above all beings.
33.and gave them signs wherein there was a manifest trial.
34.These men do say,
35.`There is nothing but our first death; we shall not be revived.
36. Bring us our fathers, if you speak truly!'
37.Are they better, or the people of Tubba' and those before them whom Wedestroyed?  They were surely sinners. They were surely sinners.
38.We created not the heavens and earth, and all that between them is, in play;
39.We created them not save in truth; but most of them know it not.
%498% 40.Surely the Day of Decision shall be their appointed time, alltogether,
41. the day a master shall avail nothing a client, and they shall not be helped,
42.save him upon whom God has mercy; He is the All-mighty, theAll-compassionate.
43.Lo, the Tree of Ez-Zakkoum
44.is the food of the guilty,
45.like molten copper, bubbling in the belly
46. as boiling water bubbles.
47.`Take him, and thrust him into the midst of Hell,
48.then pour over his head the chastisement of boiling water!'
49.`Taste!  Surely thou art the mighty, the noble.
50.This is that concerning which you were doubting.'
51. Surely the godfearing shall be in a station secure
52.among gardens and fountains,
53.robed in silk and brocade, set face to face.
54.Even so; and We shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris,
55.therein calling for every fruit, secure.
56. They shall not taste therein of death, save the first death,And He shall guard them against the chastisement of Hell--
57.a bounty from thy Lord; that is the mighty triumph.
58.Now We have made it easy by thy tongue, that haply they may remember.
59.So be on the watch; they too are on the watch.
%499% <45,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.The sending down of the Book is from God, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
3.Surely in the heavens and earth there are signs for the believers;
4.and in your creation, and the crawling things He scatters abroad, there aresigns for a people having sure faith,
5.and in the alternation of night and day, and the provision God sends downfrom heaven, and therewith revives the earth after it is dead, and theturning about of the winds, there are signs for a people whounderstand.
6.Those are the signs of God that We recite to thee in truth; in what manner ofdiscourse then, after God and His signs, will they believe?
7.Woe to every guilty impostor
8.who hears the signs of God being recited to him, then perseveres in waxingproud, as if he has not heard them; so give him the good tidings of a painfulchastisement.
9.And when he knows anything of Our signs, he takes them in mockery; those--forthem awaits a humbling chastisement.
10.Behind them Gehenna Hell.; and that they have earned shall not avail themaught, nor those they took as protectors, apart from God; for them awaits amighty chastisement.
11.This is guidance; and those who disbelieve in the signs of their Lord, thereawaits them a painful chastisement of wrath.
12.God is He who has subjected to you the sea, that the ships may run on it atHis commandment, and that you may seek His bounty; haply so you will bethankful.
13.And He has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth,all together, from Him. Surely in that are signs for a people who reflect.
%500% 14.Say unto those who believe, that they forgive thosewho do not look for thedays of God, that He may recompense a people for that they have beenearning.
15.Whoso does righteousness, it is to his own gain, and whoso does evil, it isto his own loss; then to your Lord you shall be returned.
16.Indeed, We gave the Children of Israel the Book, the Judgment, and theProphethood, and We provided them with good things, and We preferred themabove all beings.
17.We gave them clear signs of the Command; so they differed not, except afterthe knowledge had come to them, being insolent one to another. Surely thyLord will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection touching theirdifferences.
18.Then We set thee upon an open way of the Command; therefore follow it,and follow not the caprices of those who do not know.
19.Surely they will not avail thee aught against God. Surely the evildoers arefriends one of the other; God is the friend of the godfearing.
20.This is clear proofs for men, and a guidance, and a mercyto a people having sure faith.
21.Or do those who commit evil deeds think that We shall make them as thosewho believe and do righteous deeds, equal their living and their dying?How ill they judge!
22.God created the heavens and the earth in truth, and that every soul may berecompensed for what it has earned; they shall not be wronged.
%501% 23.Hast thou seen him who has taken his caprice to be his god, and Godhas led him astray out of a knowledge, and set a seal upon his hearingand his heart, and laid a covering on his eyes?  Who shall guide himafter God?  What, will you not remember?
24.They say, `There is nothing but our present life;we die, and we live, and nothing but Time destroys us.' Of that they haveno knowledge; they merely conjecture.
25.And when Our signs are recited to them, clear signs, their only argument isthat they say, `Bring us our fathers, if you speak truly.'
26.Say: `God gives you life, then makes you die, then He shall gather you to theDay of Resurrection, wherein is no doubt, but most men do not know.'
27.To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And on the day whenthe Hour is come, upon that day the vain-doers shall lose.
28.And thou shalt see every nation hobbling on their knees, every nation beingsummoned unto its Book: `Today you shall be recompensed for that you weredoing.
29.This is Our Book, that speaks against you the truth; We have been registeringall that you were doing.'
30.And as for those who have believed and done deeds of righteousness,their Lord shall admit them into His mercy; that is the manifesttriumph.
31.But as for those who have disbelieved: `Were not My signs recited to you, andyou waxed proud, and were a sinful people?
32.And when it was said, "God's promise is true, and the Hour, there is nodoubt of it," you said, "We know not what the Hour may be; we have onlya surmise, and are by no means certain." '
%502% 33.And the evil deeds that they have done shall appear to them, and they shallbe encompassed by that they mocked at.
34.And it shall be said, `Today We do forget you, even as you forgot theencounter of this your day; and your refuge is the Fire, and you shall haveno helpers.
35.That is for that you took God's signs in mockery, and the present lifedeluded you.'  So today they shall not be brought forth from it, nor willthey be suffered to make amends.
36.So to God belongs praise, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth,Lord of all Being.
37.His is the Domination in the heavens and the earth; He is the All-mighty, theAll-wise.
<46,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Ha Mim
2.The sending down of the Book is from God, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
3.We have not created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is, savewith the truth and a stated term; but the unbelievers are turning away fromthat they were warned of.
4.Say: `Have you considered that you call upon apart from God?  Show me whatthey have created of the earth; or have they a partnership in the heavens?Bring me a Book before this, or some remnant of a knowledge, if you speaktruly.'
5.And who is further astray than he who calls, apart from God, upon such a oneas shall not answer him till the Day of Resurrection?  Such as are heedlessof their calling,
%503% 6.and when mankind are mustered, shall be enemies to them, and shall deny theirservice.
7.And when Our signs are recited to them, clear signs, the unbelievers say tothe truth when it has come to them, `This is manifest sorcery.'
8.Or do they say, `He has forged it'?  Say: `If I have forged it, you have nopower to help me against God. He knows very well what you are pressing upon;He suffices as a witness between me and you; He is the All-forgiving,the All-compassionate.'
9.Say: `I am not an innovation among the Messengers, and I know not whatshall be done with me or with you. I only follow what is revealed to me;I am only a clear warner.'
10.Say: `Have you considered?  If it be from God, and you disbelieve in it, anda witness from among the Children of Israel bears witness to its like, andbelieves, and you wax proud, God guides not the people of theevildoers.'
11.The unbelievers say, as regards the believers, `If it had been aught good,they had not outstripped us to it.' And since they are not guided by it,certainly they will say, `This is an old calumny!'
12.Yet before it was the Book of Moses for a model and a mercy; and this isa Book confirming, in Arabic tongue, to warn the evildoers, and good tidingsto the good-doers.
13.Surely those who say, `Our Lord is God' and then go straight, no fear shallbe on them, neither shall they sorrow.
14.Those are the inhabitants of Paradise, therein dwelling forever, as arecompense for that they have been doing.
%504% 15.We have charged man, that he be kind to his parents; his mother bore himpainfully, and painfully she gave birth to him; his bearing and his weaningare thirty months. Until, when he is fully grown, and reaches forty years,he says, `O my Lord, dispose me that I may be thankful for Thy blessingwherewith Thou hast blessed me and my father and mother, and that I may dorighteousness well-pleasing to Thee; and make me righteous also in my seed.Behold, I repent to Thee, and am among those that surrender.'
16.Those are they from whom We shall accept the best of what they have done, andWe shall pass over their evil deeds. They are among the inhabitants ofParadise--the promise of the very truth, which they were promised.
17.But he who says to his father and his mother, `Fie upon you!  Do you promiseme that I shall be brought forth, when already generations have passed awaybefore me?'  while they call upon God for succour--`Woe upon thee!  Believe;surely God's promise is true'; then he says, `This is naught but the fairy--tales of the ancients'--
18.such men are they against whom has been realized the Word concerning nationsthat passed away before them, men and jinn alike; they were losers.
19.All shall have their degrees, according to what they have wrought, and thatHe may pay them in full for their works, and they not being wronged.
20.Upon the day when the unbelievers are exposed to the Fire: `You dissipatedyour good things in your present life, and you took your enjoyment in them;therefore today you shall be recompensed with the chastisement of humiliationfor that you waxed proud in the earth without right, and for yourungodliness.'
%505% 21.And remember the brother of Ad, when he warned his people beside the sand-dunes--and already warners had passed away alike before him and behind him--saying, `Serve none but God!  Truly I fear for you the chastisement of adreadful day.'
22.They said, `What, hast thou come to pervert us from our gods?  Then bring usthat thou promisest us, if indeed thou speakest truly.'
23.He said, `Knowledge is only with God, and I deliver to you the Message withwhich I was sent; but I see you are an ignorant people.'
24.Then, when they saw it as a sudden cloud coming towards their valleys, theysaid, `This is a cloud, that shall give us rain!' `Not so; rather it is thatyou sought to hasten--a wind, wherein is a painful chastisement,
25.destroying everything by the commandment of its Lord.'  So in the morningthere was naught to be seen but their dwelling-places. Even so do Werecompense the people of the sinners.
26.And We had established them in that wherein We have not established you,and We appointed for them hearing, and sight, and hearts; and yet theirhearing, their sight and their hearts availed them nothing, since they deniedthe signs of God, and they were encompassed by that they mocked at.
27.And We destroyed the cities about you, and We turned about the signs, thathaply they would return.
28.Then why did those not help them that they had taken to themselves asmediators, gods apart from God?  Not so; but they went astray from them,and that was their calumny, and what they had been forging.
%506% 29.And when We turned to thee a company of jinn giving ear to the Koran; andwhen they were in its presence they said, `Be silent!'  Then, when it wasfinished, they turned back to their people, warning.
30.They said, `Our people, we have heard a Book that was sent down after Moses,confirming what was before it, guiding to the truth and to a straightpath.
31.O our people, answer God's summoner, and believe in Him, and He will forgiveyou some of your sins, and protect you from a painful chastisement.
32.Whosoever answers not God's summoner cannot frustrate God in the earth, andhe has no protectors apart from Him; those are in manifest error.'
33.What, have they not seen that God who created the heavens and earth, notbeing wearied by creating them, is able to give life to the dead?  Yesindeed; He is powerful over everything.
34.Upon the day when the unbelievers are exposed to the Fire: `Is not this thetruth?' They shall say, `Yes, by our Lord!' He shall say, `Then taste thechastisement of your unbelief!'
35.So be thou patient, as the Messengers possessed of constancy were alsopatient. Seek not to hasten it for them--it shall be as if, on the day theysee that they are promised, they had not tarried but for an hour of a singleday. A Message to be delivered!  And shall any be destroyed but the peopleof the ungodly?
%507% <47,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way, God will send their worksastray.
2.But those who believe and do righteous deeds and believe in what is sent downto Muhammad--and it is the truth from their Lord--He will acquit them oftheir evil deeds, and dispose their minds aright.
3.That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and those who believefollow the truth from their Lord. Even so God strikes their similitudes formen.
4.When you meet the unbelievers, smite their necks, then, when you have madewide slaughter among them, tie fast the bonds; then set them free, either bygrace or ransom, till the war lays down its loads. So it shall be; and ifGod had willed, He would have avenged Himself upon them; but that He may trysome of you by means of others. And those who are slain in the way of God,He will not send their works astray.
5.He will guide them, and dispose their minds aright,
6.and He will admit them to Paradise, that He has made known to them.
7.O believers, if you help God, He will help you, and confirm your feet.
8.But as for the unbelievers, ill chance shall befall them!He will send their works astray.
9.That is because they have been averse to what God has sent down, so He hasmade their works to fail.
10.What, have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end ofthose before them?  God destroyed them; the unbelievers shall have the likesthereof.
11.That is because God is the Protector of the believers, and that theunbelievers have no protector.
%508% 12.God shall surely admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardensunderneath which rivers flow. As for the unbelievers, they take theirenjoyment and eat as cattle eat; and the Fire shall be their lodging.
13.How many a city that was stronger in mightthan thy city which has expelled thee have We destroyed!  And there was nohelper for them.
14.What, is he who is upon a clear sign from his Lord like unto such a oneunto whom his evil deeds have been decked out fair, and they have followedtheir caprices?
15.This is the similitude of Paradise which the godfearing have been promised:therein are rivers of water unstaling, rivers of milk unchanging in flavour,and rivers of wine--a delight to the drinkers,rivers, too, of honey purified; and therein for them is every fruit,and forgiveness from their Lord--Are they as he who dwells foreverin the Fire, such as are given to drink boiling water, that tears theirbowels asunder?
16.And some of them there are give ear to thee, till, when they go forth fromthee, they say to those who have been given knowledge, `What said he justnow?'  Those are they upon whose hearts God has set a seal, and they havefollowed their caprices.
17.But those who are guided aright, them He increases in guidance, and givesthem their godfearing.
18.Are they looking for aught but the Hour, that it shall come upon themsuddenly?  Already its tokens have come; so, when it has come to them, howshall they have their Reminder?
19.Know thou therefore that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for thysin, and for the believers, men and women. God knows your going to and fro,and your lodging.
%509% 20.Those who believe say, `Why has a sura not been sent down?' Then, when aclear sura is sent down, and therein fighting is mentioned, thou seest thosein whose hearts is sickness looking at thee as one who swoons of death; butbetter for them
21.would be obedience, and words honourable. Then, when the matter is resolved,if they were true to God, it would be better for them.
22.If you turned away, would you then haply work corruption in the land, andbreak your bonds of kin?
23.Those are they whom God has cursed, and so made them deaf, and blindedtheir eyes.
24.What, do they not ponder the Koran?  Or is it that there are locks upontheir hearts?
25.Those who have turned back in their traces after the guidance has becomeclear to them, Satan it was that tempted them, and God respitedthem.
26.That is because they said to those who were averse to what God sent down, `Wewill obey you in some of the affair'; and God knows their secrets.
27.How shall it be, when the angels take them, beating their faces andtheir backs?
28.That is because they have followed what angers God, and have been averse toHis good pleasure, so He has made their works to fail.
29.Or did those in whose hearts is sickness think that God would not bring tolight their rancour?
%510% 30.Did We will, We would show them to thee, then thou wouldst know them by theirmark; and thou shalt certainly know them in the twisting of their speech; andGod knows your deeds.
31.And We shall assuredly try you until We know those of you who struggle andare steadfast, and try your tidings.
32.Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way and make a breach with theMessenger after the guidance has become clear to them, they will nothing hurtGod, and He will make their works to fail.
33.O believers, obey God, and obey the Messenger, and do not make yourown works vain.
34.Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way and then die disbelieving, themGod will not forgive.
35.So do not faint and call for peace; you shall be the upper ones, and Godis with you, and will not deprive you of your works.
36.The present life is naught but a sport and a diversion; and if you believeand are godfearing, He will give you your wages, and will not ask of youyour goods.
37.If He asks you for them, and presses you, you are niggardly, and He brings tolight your rancour.
38.Ha, there you are; you are called upon to expend in God's way, and some ofyou are niggardly. Whoso is niggardly is niggardly only to his own soul.God is the All-sufficient; you are the needy ones. If you turn away, He willsubstitute another people instead of you, then they will not be yourlikes.
%511% <48,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Surely We have given thee a manifest victory,
2.that God may forgive thee thy former and thy latter sins, and complete Hisblessing upon thee, and guide thee on a straight path,
3.and that God may help thee with mighty help.
4.It is He who sent down the Shechina sakina:symbol, security into thehearts of the believers, that they might add faith to their faith--to Godbelong the hosts of the heavens and the earth; God is All-knowing,All-wise--
5.and that He may admit the believers, men and women alike, into gardensunderneath which rivers flow, therein to dwell forever, and acquit them oftheir evil deeds; that is in God's sight a mighty triumph;
6.and that He may chastise the hypocrites, men and women alike, and theidolaters, men and women alike, and those who think evil thoughts of God;against them shall be the evil turn of fortune. God is wroth with them, andhas cursed them, and has prepared for them Gehenna Hell.--an evilhomecoming!
7.To God belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth;God is All-mighty, All-wise.
8.Surely We have sent thee as a witness, good tidings to bear, and warning,
9.that you may believe in God and His Messenger and succour Him, and reverenceHim, and that you may give Him glory at the dawn and in the evening.
%512% 10.Those who swear fealty to thee swear fealty in truth to God; God's hand isover their hands. Then whosoever breaks his oath breaks it but to his ownhurt; and whoso fulfils his covenant made with God, God will give him amighty wage.
11.The Bedouins who were left behind will say to thee, `We were occupiedby our possessions and our families; so ask forgiveness for us!'  They saywith their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: `Who can avail youaught against God, if He desires hurt for you, or desires profit foryou?  Nay, but God is ever aware of the things you do.
12.Nay, but you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never returnto their families, and that was decked out fair in your hearts, and youthought evil thoughts, and you were a people corrupt.'
13.Whoso believes not in God and His Messenger, We have prepared for theunbelievers a Blaze.
14.To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth; whomsoever Hewill He forgives, andwhomsoever He will He chastises; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
15.The Bedouins who were left behind will say, when you set forth afterspoils, to take them, `Let us follow you,' desiring to change God's words.Say: `You shall not follow us; so God said before.' Then they will say,`Nay, but you are jealous of us.'  Nay, but they have not understood excepta little.
%513% 16.Say to the Bedouins who were left behind: `You shall be called against apeople possessed of great might to fight them, or they surrender. If youobey, God will give you a goodly wage; but if you turn your backs, as youturned your backs before, He will chastise you with a painfulchastisement.'
17.There is no fault in the blind, and there is no fault in the lame, and thereis no fault in the sick. And whosoever obeys God and His Messenger, He willadmit him into gardens underneath which rivers flow; but whosoever turns hisback, him He will chastise with a painful chastisement.
18.God was well pleased with the believers when they were swearing fealty tothee under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent downthe Shechina sakina upon them, and rewarded them with a nigh victory
19.and many spoils to take; and God is ever All-mighty, All-wise.
20.God has promised you many spoils to take; these He has hastened toyou, and has restrained the hands of men from you, and that it may be asign to the believers, and to guide you on a straight path,
21.and other spoils you were not able to take ; God had encompassed themalready. God is powerful over everything.
22.If the unbelievers had fought you, they would have turned their backs, andthen found neither protector nor helper;
23.the wont of God, as in the past before, and thou shalt never find anychanging the wont of God.
%514% 24.It is He who restrained their hands from you, and your hands from them, inthe hollow of Mecca, after that He made you victors over them. God seesthe things you do.
25.They are the ones who disbelieved, and barred you from the Holy Mosqueand the offering, detained so as not to reach its place of sacrifice.If it had not been for certain men believers and certain women believerswhom you knew not, lest you should trample them, and there befall youguilt unwittingly on their account that God may admit into His mercywhom He will, had they been separated clearly, then We would have chastisedthe unbelievers among them with a painful chastisement.
26.When the unbelievers set in their hearts fierceness, the fierceness ofpagandom, then God sent down His Shechina Hell upon His Messenger and thebelievers, and fastened to them the word of godfearing to which they havebetter right and are worthy of; and God has knowledgeof everything.
27.God has indeed fulfilled the vision He vouchsafed to His Messenger truly:`You shall enter the Holy Mosque, if God wills, in security, your headsshaved, your hair cut short, not fearing.'  He knew what you knew not, andappointed ere that a nigh victory.
28.It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion oftruth, that He may uplift it above every religion.God suffices as awitness.
%515% 29.Muhammad is the Messenger of God, and those who are with him are hardagainst the unbelievers, merciful one to another. Thou seest thembowing, prostrating, seeking bounty from God and good pleasure. Theirmark is on their faces, the trace of prostration. That is their likenessin the Torah, and their likeness in the Gospel: as a seed that putsforth its shoot, and strengthens it, and it grows stout and rises straightupon its stalk, pleasing the sowers, that through them He may enragethe unbelievers. God has promised those of them who believe and do deedsof righteousness forgiveness and a mighty wage.
<49,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O believers, advance not before God and His Messenger; and fear God. God isAll-hearing, All-knowing.
2.O believers, raise not your voices above the Prophet's voice, and be not loudin your speech to him, as you are loud one to another, lest your works failwhile you are notaware.
3.Surely those who lower their voices in the presence of God's Messenger, thoseare they whose hearts God has tested for godfearing; they shall haveforgiveness and a mighty wage.
4.Surely those who call unto thee from behind the apartments, the most of themdo not understand.
%516% 5.And if they had patience, until thou comest out to them, that would be betterfor them; and God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
6.O believers, if an ungodly man comes to you with a tiding, make clear, lestyou afflict a people unwittingly, and then repent of what you have done.
7.And know that the Messenger of God is among you. If he obeyed youin much of the affair, you would suffer; but God has endeared to youbelief, decking it fair in your hearts, and He has made detestable to youunbelief and ungodliness and disobedience. Those--they arethe right-minded,
8.by God's favour and blessing; God is All-knowing, All-wise.
9.If two parties of the believers fight, put things right between them; then,if one of them is insolent against the other, fight the insolent one till itreverts to God's commandment. If it reverts, set things right between themequitably, and be just. Surely God loves the just.
10.The believers indeed are brothers; so set things right between yourtwo brothers, and fear God; haply so you will find mercy.
11.O believers, let not any people scoff at another people who may bebetter than they; neither let women scoff at women who may be betterthan themselves. And find not fault with one another, neither revile oneanother by nicknames. And evil name is ungodliness after belief. Andwhoso repents not, those--they are the evildoers.
%517% 12.O believers, eschew much suspicion; some suspicion is a sin. And do notspy, neither back bite one another; would any of you like to eat theflesh of his brother dead?  You would abominate it. And fear you God;assuredly God turns, and He is All-compassionate.
13.O mankind, We have created you male and female, and appointed youraces and tribes, that you may know one another. Surely the noblestamong you in the sight of God is the most godfearing of you. God isAll-knowing, All-aware.
14.The Bedouins say, `We believe.' Say: `You do not believe; rather say, "Wesurrender"; for belief has not yet entered your hearts. If you obey God andHis Messenger, He will not diminish you anything of your works. God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate.'
15.The believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, then havenot doubted, and have struggled with their possessions and their selvesin the way of God; those--they are the truthful ones.
16.Say: `What, would you teach God what your religion is, and God knowswhat is in the heavens and what is in the earth?  And God has knowledgeof everything.'
17.They count it as a favour to thee that they have surrendered!  Say: `Do notcount your surrendering as a favour to me; nay, but rather God confers afavour upon you, in that He has guided you to belief, if it be that you aretruthful.
18.God knows the Unseen of the heavens and of the earth; and God seesthe things you do.'
%518% <50,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.QafBy the glorious Koran!
2.Nay, but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and theunbelievers say, `This is a marvellous thing!
3.What, when we are dead and become dust?  That is a far returning!'
4.We know what the earth diminishes of them; with Us is a book recording.
5.Nay, but they cried lies to the truth when it came to them, and so they arein a case confused.
6.What, have they not behold heaven above them, how We have built it, anddecked it out fair, and it has no cracks?
7.And the earth--We stretched it forth, and cast on it firm mountains,and We caused to grow therein of every joyous kind
8.for an insight and a reminder to every penitent servant.
9.And We sent down out of heaven water blessed, and caused to grow therebygardens and grain of harvest
10.and tall palm-trees with spathes compact,
11.a provision for the servants, and thereby We revived a land that was dead.Even so is the coming forth.
12.Cried lies before them the people of Noah and the men of Er-Rass, andThamood,
13.and Ad and Pharaoh, the brothers of Lot,
14.the men of the Thicket, the people of Tubba'. Every one cried lies to theMessengers, and My threat came true.
15.What, were We wearied by the first creation?  No indeed; but they are inuncertainty as to the new creation.
%519% 16.We indeed created man; and We know what his soul whispers within him,and We are nearer to him than the jugular vein.
17.When the two angels meet together, sitting one on the right, and oneon the left,
18.not a word he utters, but by him is an observer ready.
19.And death's agony comes in truth; that is what thou wast shunning!
20.And the Trumpet shall be blown; that is the Day of the Threat.
21.And every soul shall come, and with it a driver and a witness.
22.`Thou wast heedless of this; therefore We have now removed from thee thycovering, and so thy sight today is piercing.'
23.And his comrade shall say, `This is what I have, made ready.'
24.`Cast, you twain, into Gehenna every froward unbeliever,
25.every hinderer of the good, transgressor, disquieter,
26.who set up with God another god; therefore, you twain, cast him into theterrible chastisement.
27.`And his comrade shall say, `Our Lord, I made him not insolent, but he was infar error.'
28.He shall say, `Dispute not before Me!  For I sent you beforehandthe threat.
29.The Word is not changed with Me; I wrong not My servants.'
30.Upon the day We shall say unto Gehenna, `Art thou filled?' And it shall say,`Are there any more to come?'
31.And Paradise shall be brought forward to the godfearing, not afar:
32.`This is that you were promised; it is for every mindful penitent.'
33.Whosoever fears the All-merciful in the Unseen, and comes with apenitent heart:
34.`Enter it in peace!  This is the Day of Eternity.'
35.Therein they shall have whatever they will; and with Us there is yetmore.
%520% 36.How many a generation We destroyed before them that was stronger in valourthan they, then they searched about in the land; was there any asylum?
37.Surely in that there is a reminder to him who has a heart, or will give earwith a present mind.
38.We created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is, in six days,and no Weariness touched Us.
39.So be thou patient under what they say, and proclaim thy Lord's praisebefore the rising of the sun, and before its setting,
40.and proclaim thy Lord's praise in the night, and at the ends of theprostrations.
41.And listen thou for the day when the caller shall call from a near place.
42.On the day they hear the Cry in truth, that is the day of coming forth.
43.It is We who give life, and made to die, and to Us is the homecoming.
44.Upon the day when the earth is split asunder from about them as they hastenforth; that is a mustering easy for Us.
45.We know very well what they say; thou art not a tyrant over them.Thereforeremind by the Koran him who fears My threat.
<51,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the swift scatterers
2.and the burden-bearers
3.and the smooth runners
4.and the partitioners,
5.surely that you are promised is true,
6.and surely the Doom is about to fall!
%521% 7.By heaven with all its tracks
8.surely you speak at variance,
9.and perverted therefrom are some.
10.Perish the conjecturers
11.who are dazed in perplexity
12.asking, `When shall be the Day of Doom?'
13.Upon the day when they shall be tried at the Fire:
14.`Taste your trial! This is that you were seeking to hasten.'
15.Surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
16.taking whatsoever their Lord has given them; they were good-doers beforethat.
17.Little of the night would they slumber,
18.and in the mornings they would ask for forgiveness;
19.and the beggar and the outcast had a share in their wealth.
20.In the earth are signs for those having sure faith;
21.and in your selves; what, do you not see?
22.And in heaven is your provision, and that you are promised.
23.So by the Lord of heaven and earth, it is as surely true as that you havespeech.
24.Hast thou received the story of the honoured guests of Abraham?
25.When they entered unto him, saying `Peace!' he said `Peace! You are a peopleunknown to me.'
26.Then he turned to his household and brought a fattened calf,
27.and he laid it before them saying, `Will you not eat?'
28.Then he conceived a fear of them. They said, `Be not afraid!' And they gavehim good tidings of a cunning boy.
29.Then came forward his wife, clamouring, and she smote her face, and said, `Anold woman, barren!'
30.They said, `So says thy Lord; He is the All-wise, theAll-knowing.'
%522% 31.Said he, `And what is your business, envoys?'
32.They said, `We have been sent to a people of sinners,
33.to loose upon them stones of clay
34.marked with thy Lord for the prodigal.'
35.So We brought forth such believers as were in it,
36.but We found not therein except one house of those that have surrenderedthemselves.
37.And therein We left a sign to those who fear the painful chastisement.
38.And also in Moses, when We sent him unto Pharaoh, with a clear authority,
39.but he turned his back, with his court, saying, `A sorcerer, or a manpossessed!'
40.So We seized him and his hosts, and We cast them into the sea, and heblameworthy.
41.And also in Ad, when We loosed against them the withering wind
42.that left nothing it came upon, but made it as stuff decayed.
43.And also in Thamood, when it was said to them, `Take your enjoyment for awhile!'
44.Then they turned in disdain from the commandment of their Lord, and thethunderbolt took them and they themselves beholding.
45.and they were not able to stand upright, and were not helped.
46.And the people of Noah before; surely they were an ungodly people.
47.And heaven--We built it with might, and We extend it wide.
48.And the earth--We spread it forth; O excellent Smoothers!
49.And of everything created We two kinds; haply you will remember.
50.Therefore flee unto God!  I am a clear warner from Him to you.
51.And set not up with God another god; I am a clear warner from Him to you.
%523% 52.Even so not a Messenger came to those before them but they said, `A sorcerer,or a man possessed!'
53.What, have they bequeathed it one to another?  Nay, but they are an insolentpeople.
54.So turn thou from them; thou wilt not be reproached.
55.And remind; the Reminder profits the believers.
56.I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me.
57.I desire of them no provision, neither do I desire that they should feed Me.
58.Surely God is the All-provider, the Possessor of Strength, the Ever-Sure
59.The evildoers shall have their portion, like the portion of their fellows; solet them not hasten Me!
60.So woe to the unbelievers, for that day of theirs that they arepromised.
<52,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the Mount
2.and a Book inscribed
3.in a parchment unrolled,
4.by the House inhabited
5.and the roof uplifted
6.and the sea swarming,
7.surely they Lord's chastisement is about to fall;
8.there is none to avert it.
9.Upon the day when heaven spins dizzily
10.and the mountains are in motion,
11.Woe that day unto those that cry lies,
12.such as play at plunging,
13.the day when they shall be pitched into the fire of Gehenna:
14.`This is the fire that you cried lies to!
%524% 15.What, is this magic, or is it you that do not see?
16.Roast in it!  And bear you patiently, or bear not patiently, equal it is toyou; you are only being recompensedfor that you were working.'
17.Surely the godfearing shall be in gardens and bliss
18.rejoicing in that their Lord has given them; and their Lord shall guard themagainst the chastisement of Hell.
19.`Eat and drink, with wholesome appetite, for that you were working.'
20.Reclining upon couches ranged in rows; and We shall espouse them to wide-eyedhouris.
21.And those who believed, and their seed followed them in belief, We shall jointheir seed with them, and We shall not defraud them of aught of their work;every man shall be pledged for what he earned.
22.And We shall succour them with fruits and flesh such as they desire
23.while they pass therein a cup one to another wherein is no idle talk, nocause of sin,
24.and there go round them youths, their own, as if they were hidden pearls.
25.They advance one upon another, asking each other questions.
26.They say, `We were before among our people, ever going in fear,
27.and God was gracious to us, and guarded us against the chastisement of theburning wind;
28.we were before ever calling upon Him; surely He is the All-benign, theAll-compassionate.'
29.Therefore remind!  by the Lord's blessing thou art not a soothsayerneither possessed.
30.Or do they say, `He is a poet for whom we await Fate'suncertainty'?
31.Say: `Await!  I shall be awaiting with you.'
%525% 32.Or do their intellects bid them do this?  Or are they an insolent people?
33.Or do they say, `He has invented it?' Nay, but they do not believe.
34.Then let them bring a discourse like it, if they speak truly.
35.Or were they created out of nothing?  Or are they the creators?
36.Or did they create the heavens and earth?Nay, but they have not sure faith.
37.Or are thy Lord's treasuries in their keeping?  Or are they the registrars?
38.Or have they a ladder whereon they listen?  Then let any of them that haslistened bring a clear authority.
39.Or has He daughters, and they sons?
40.Or askest thou them for a wage, and so they are weighed down withdebt?
41.Or is the Unseen in their keeping, and so they are writing it down?
42.Or desire they to outwit?  The unbelievers, they are the outwitted.
43.Or have they a god, other than God?  Glory be to God, above that whichthey associate!
44.Even if they saw lumps falling from heaven, they would say, `A massedcloud!'
45.Then leave them, till they encounter their day wherein they shall bethunderstruck,
46.the day when their guile shall avail them naught, and they shall not behelped.
47.And there surely awaits the evildoers a chastisement beyond even that, butmost of them know it not.
48.And be thou patient under the judgment of thy Lord; Surely thou art beforeOur eyes. And proclaim the praise of thy Lord when thou arisest,
49.and proclaim the praise of thy Lord in the night, and at the declining of thestars.
%526% <53,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the Star when it plunges,
2.your comrade is not astray, neither errs,
3.nor speaks he out of caprice.
4.This is naught but a revelation revealed,
5.taught him by one terrible in power,
6.very strong; he stood poised,
7.being on the higher horizon,
8.then drew near and suspended hung,
9.two bows'-length away, or nearer,
10.then revealed to his servant that he revealed.
11.His heart lies not of what he saw;
12.what, will you dispute with him what he sees?
13.Indeed, he saw him another time
14.by the Lote-Tree of the Boundary
15.nigh which is the Garden of the Refuge,
16.when there covered the Lote-Tree that which covered;
17.his eye swerved not, nor swept astray.
18.Indeed, he saw one of the greatest signs of his Lord.
19.Have you considered El-Lat and El-'Uzza
20.and Manat the third, the other?
21.What, have you males, and He females?
22.That were indeed an unjust division.
23.They are naught but names yourselves have named, and your fathers; God hassent down no authority touching them. They follow only surmise, and what thesouls desire; and yet guidance has come to them from their Lord.
24.Or shall man have whatever he fancies?
25.And to God belongs the First and the Last.
26.How many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession avails notanything, save after that God gives leave to whomsoever He wills and iswell-pleased.
%527% 27.Those who do not believe in the world to come name the angels with the namesof females.
28.They have not any knowledge thereof; they follow only surmise, and surmiseavails naught against truth.
29.So turn thou from him who turns away from Our Remembrance, and desires onlythe present life.
30.That is their attainment of knowledge. Surely thy Lord knows very wellthose who have gone astray from His way, and He knows very well those who areguided.
31.To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth,that He may recompense those who do evil for what they have done, andrecompense those who have done good with the reward most fair.
32.Those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies, save lesser offences--surely thy Lord is wide in His forgiveness. Very well He knows you, when Heproduced you from the earth, and when you were yet unborn in your mothers'wombs; therefore hold not yourselves purified; God knows very well him who isgodfearing.
33.Hast thou considered him who turns his back
34.and gives a little, and then grudgingly?
35.Does he possess the knowledge of the Unseen, and therefore hesees?
36.Or has he not been told of what is in the scrolls of Moses,
37.and Abraham, he who paid his debt in full?
38.That no soul laden bears the load of another,
39.and that a man shall have to his account only as he has laboured,
40.and that his labouring shall surely be seen,
41.then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense,
42.and that the final end is unto thy Lord,
43.and that it is He who makes to laugh, and that makes to weep,
44.and that it is He who makes to die, and that makes to live,
%528% 45.and that He Himself created the two kinds, male and female,
46.of a sperm-drop, when it was cast forth,
47.and that upon Him rests the second growth,
48.and that it is He who gives wealth and riches,
49.and that it is He who is the Lord of Sirius,
50.and that He destroyed Ad, the ancient,
51.and Thamood, and He did not spare them,
52.and the people of Noah before--certainly
53.they did exceeding evil, and were insolent--
54.and the Subverted City He also overthrew,
55.so that there covered it that which covered.
56.Then which of thy Lord's bounties disputest thou?
57.This is a warner, of the warners of old.
58.The Imminent is imminent; apart from God none can disclose it.
59.Do you then marvel at this discourse,
60.and do you laugh, and do you not weep,
61.while you make merry?
62.SUJDAH AYA @So bow yourselves before God, and serve Him!
<54,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The Hour has drawn nigh: the moon is split.
2.Yet if they see a sign they turn away, and they say `A continuous sorcery!'
3.They have cried lies, and followed their caprices; but every matter issettled.
4.And there have come to them such tidings as contain a deterrent--
5.a Wisdom far-reaching; yet warnings do not avail.
6.So turn thou away from them.Upon the day when the Caller shall call unto ahorrible thing,
%529% 7.abasing their eyes, they shall come forth from the tombs as if they werescattered grasshoppers,
8.running with outstretched necks to the Caller. The unbelievers shall say,`This is a hard day!'
9.The people of Noah cried lies before them; they cried lies to Our servant,and said, `A man possessed!' And he was rejected.
10.And so he called unto his Lord, saying, `I am vanquished; do Thou succourme!'
11.Then We opened the gates of heaven unto water torrential,
12.and made the earth to gush with fountains, and the waters met for a matterdecreed.
13.And We bore him upon a well-planked vessel well-caulked
14.running before Our eyes--a recompense for him denied.
15.And We left it for a sign. Is there any that will remember?
16.How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
17.Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that willremember?
18.Ad cried lies. How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
19.We loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous,
20.plucking up men as if they were stumps of uprooted palm-trees.
21.How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
22.Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that willremember?
23.Thamood cried lies to the warnings
24.and said, `What, shall we follow a mortal , one out of ourselves?  Thenindeed we should be in error and insanity!
25.Has the Reminder been cast upon him alone among us?  Nay, rather he isan impudent liar.'
26.`They shall surely know tomorrow who is the impudent liar.
27.We shall send the She-camel as a trial for them; so watch thou them and keeppatience.
%530% 28.And tell them that the water is to be divided between them, each drinkfor each in turn.'
29.Then they called their comrade, and he took in hand, and hamstrung her.
30.How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
31.We loosed against them one Cry Blast., and they were as the wattles of apen-builder.
32.Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance.Is there any that willremember?
33.The people of Lot cried lies to the warnings.
34.We loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of Lot; Wedelivered them at the dawn--
35.a blessing from Us; even so We recompense him who is thankful.
36.He had warned them of Our assault, but they disputed the warnings.
37.Even his guests they had solicited of him; so We obliterated their eyes,saying, `Taste now My chastisement and My warnings!'
38.In the morning early there come upon them a settled chastisement:
39.`Taste now My chastisement and My warning!'
40.Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that willremember?
41.The warnings came also to Pharaoh's folk
42.They cried lies to Our signs, all of them, so We seized them with the seizingof One mighty, omnipotent.
43.What, are your unbelievers better than those?  Or have you an immunity in theScrolls?
44.Or do they say, `We are a congregation that shall be succoured?'
45.Certainly the host shall be routed, and turn their backs.
46.Nay, but the Hour is their tryst, and the Hour is very calamitous andbitter.
47.Surely the sinners are in error and insanity!
48.The day when they are dragged on their faces into the Fire: `Taste now thetouch of Sakar Hell.!'
49.Surely We have created everything in measure.
%531% 50.Our commandment is but one word, as the twinkling of an eye.
51.We have destroyed the likes of you; is there any that will remember?
52.Every thing that they have done is in the Scrolls,
53.and everything, great and small, is inscribed.
54.Surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
55.in a sure abode, in the presence of a King Omnipotent.
<55,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The All-merciful
2.has taught the Koran .
3.He created man
4.and He has taught him the Explanation.
5.The sun and the moon to a reckoning,
6.and the stars and the trees bow themselves;
7.and heaven--He raised it up, and set the Balance.
8.Transgress not in the Balance,
9.and weigh with justice, and skimp not in the Balance.
10.And earth--He set it down for all beings,
11.therein fruits, and palm-trees with sheaths,
12.and grain in the blade, and fragrant herbs.
13.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
14.He created man of a clay like the potter's,
15.and He created the jinn of a smokeless fire.
16.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
%532% 17.Lord of the Two Easts, Lord of the Two Wests,
18.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
19.He let forth the two seas that meet together,
20.between them a barrier they do not overpass.
21.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
22.From them come forth the pearl and the coral.
23.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
24.His too are the ships that run, raised up in the sea like land-marks.
25.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
26.All that dwells upon the earth is perishing, yet still
27.abides the Face of thy Lord, majestic, splendid.
28.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
29.Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth implore Him; every day He is uponsome labour.
30.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
31.We shall surely attend to you at leisure, you weight and you weight!
32.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
33.O tribe of jinn and of men, if you are able to pass through the confines ofheaven and earth, pass through them!  You shall not pass through except withan authority.
34.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
35.Against you shall be loosed a flame of fire, and molten brass; and you shallnot be helped.
36.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
37.And when heaven is split asunder, and turns crimson like red leather
38.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
39.on that day none shall be questioned about his sin, neither man nor jinn.
40.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
%533% 41.The sinners shall be known by their mark,and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet.
42.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
43.This is Gehenna Hell., that sinners cried lies to;
44.they shall go round between it and between hot, boiling water.
45.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
46.But such as fears the Station of his Lord, for them shall be two gardens--
47.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
48.abounding in branches--
49.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
50.therein two fountains of running water--
51.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
52.therein of every fruit two kinds--
53.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
54.reclining upon couches lined with brocade,the fruits of the gardens nigh to gather--
55.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
56.therein maidens restraining their glances,untouched before them by any man or jinn--
57.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
58.lovely as rubies, beautiful as coral--
59.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
60.Shall the recompense of goodness be other than goodness?
61.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
62.And besides these shall be two gardens--
63.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
64.green, green pastures--
65.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
66.therein two fountains of gushing water--
67.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
%534% 68.therein fruits, and palm-trees, and pomegranates--
69.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
70.therein maidens good and comely--
71.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
72.houris, cloistered in cool pavilions--
73.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
74.untouched before them by any man or jinn--
75.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
76.reclining upon green cushions and lovely druggets--
77.O which of your Lord's bounties will you and you deny?
78.Blessed be the Name of they Lord, majestic, splendid.
<56,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When the Terror descends
2.and none denies its descending
3.abasing, exalting,
4.when the earth shall be rocked
5.and the mountains crumbled
6.and become a dust scattered,
7.and you shall be three bands--
8.Companions of the Right, O Companions of the Right!
9.Companions of the Left, O Companions of the Left!
10.and the Outstrippers: the Outstrippers
11.those are they brought nigh the Throne,
12.in the Gardens of Delight
13.a throng of the ancients
14.and how few of the later folk
15.upon close-wrought couches
16.reclining upon them, set face to face,
%535% 17.immortal youths going round about them
18.with goblets, and ewers, and a cup from a spring
19.no brows throbbing, no intoxication
20.and such fruits as they shall choose,
21.and such flesh of fowl as they desire,
22.and wide-eyed houris
23.as the likeness of hidden pearls,
24.a recompense for that they laboured.
25.Therein they shall hear no idle talk, no cause of sin,26.only the saying `Peace, Peace!'
27.The Companions of the Right, O Companions of the Right!
28.mid thornless lote-trees
29.and serried acacias,
30.and spreading shade
31.and outpoured waters,
32.and fruits abounding
33.unfailing, unforbidden,
34.and upraised couches.
35.Perfectly We formed them, perfect,
36.and We made them spotless virgins,
37.chastely amorous, like of age
38.for the Companions of the Right.
39.A throng of the ancients
40.and a throng of the later folk.
41.The Companions of the Left, O Companions of the Left!
42.mid burning winds and boiling waters
43.and the shadow of a smoking blaze
44.neither cool, neither goodly;
45.and before that they lived at ease,
46.and persisted in the Great Sin,
47.ever saying, `What when we are dead and becomedust and bones, shall we indeed be raised up?
48.What, and our fathers, the ancients?'
49.Say: `The ancients, and the later folk
50.shall be gathered to the appointed time of a known day.
%536% 51.Then you erring ones, you that cried lies,
52.you shall eat of a tree called Zakkoum,
53.and you shall fill therewith your bellies
54.and drink on top of that boiling water
55.lapping it down like thirsty camels.'
56.This shall be their hospitality on the Day of Doom.
57.We created you; therefore why will you not believe?
58.Have you considered the seed you spill?
59.Do you yourselves create it, or are We the Creators?
60.We have decreed among you Death; We shall not be outstripped;
61.that We may exchange the likes of you, and make you to grow again in afashion you know not.
62.You have known the first growth; so why will you not remember?
63.Have you considered the soil you till?
64.Do you yourselves sow it, or are We the Sowers?
65.Did We will, We would make it broken orts, and you would remain bitterlyjesting--
66.`We are debt-loaded;
67.nay, we have been robbed!'
68.Have you considered the water you drink?
69.Did you send it down from the clouds, or did We send it?
70.Did We will, We would make it bitter; so why are you notthankful?
71.Have you consideredthe fire you kindle?
72.Did you make its timber to grow, or did We make it?
73.We Ourselves made it for a reminder, and a boon to the desert-dwellers.
74.Then magnify the Name of thy Lord, the All-mighty.
75.No! I swear by the fallings of the stars
76.and that is indeed a mighty oath, did you but know it
%537% 77.it is surely a noble Koran
78.in a hidden Book
79.none but the purified shall touch,
80.a sending down from the Lord of all Being.
81.What, do you hold this discourse in disdain,
82.and do you make it your living to cry lies?
83.Why, but when the soul leaps to the throat of the dying
84.and that hour you are watching
85.And We are nigher him than you, but you do not see Us
86.why, if you are not at Our disposal,
87.do you not bring back his soul, if you speak truly?
88.Then, if he be of those brought nigh the Throne,
89.there shall be repose and ease, and a Garden of Delight;
90.and if he be a Companion of the Right:
91.`Peace be upon thee, Companion of the Right!'
92.But if he be of them that cried lies, and went astray,
93.there shall be a hospitality of boiling water
94.and the roasting in Hell.
95.Surely this is the truth of certainty.
96.Then magnify the Name of thy Lord, the All-mighty.
<57,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God;He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.
2.To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth;He gives life, and He makes to die, and He is powerful over everything.
3.He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward;He has knowledge of everything.
%538% 4.It is He that created the heavens and the earth in six days then seatedHimself upon the Throne.He knows what penetrates into the earth, and whatcomes forth from it, what comes down from heaven, and what goes up unto it.He is with you wherever you are; and God sees the things you do.
5.To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and unto Him allmatters are returned.
6.He makes the night to enter into the day and makes theday to enter into thenight.He knows the thoughts within the breasts.
7.Believe in God and His Messenger, and expend of that unto which He has madeyou successors.And those of you who believe and expend shall have a mightywage.
8.How is it with you, that you believe not in God seeing that the Messenger iscalling you to believe in your Lord, and He has taken compact with you, ifyou are believers?
9.It is He who sends down upon His servant signs, clear signs, that He maybring you forth from the shadows into the light.Surely God is to youAll-gentle, All-compassionate.
10.How is it with you, that you expend not in the way of God, and to God belongsthe inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Not equal is he among you whospent, and who fought before the victory; those are mightier in rank thanthey who spent and fought afterwards; and unto each God has promised thereward most fair; and God is aware of the things you do.
11.Who is he that will lend to God a good loan, and He will multiply it for him,and his shall be a generous wage?
%539% 12.Upon the day when thou seest the believers, men and women, their lightrunning before them, and on their right hands.`Good tidings for you today!Gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein to dwell for ever; that isindeed the mighty triumph.'
13.Upon the day when the hypocrites, men and women, shall say to those who havebelieved, `Wait for us, so that we may borrow your light!' It shall be said,`Return you back behind, and seek for a light!' And a wall shall be set upbetween them, having a door in the inward whereof is mercy, and against theoutward thereof is chastisement.
14.They shall be calling unto them, `Were we not with you?' They shall say,`Yes indeed; but you tempted yourselves, and you awaited, and you were indoubt, and fancies deluded you, until God's commandment came, and the Deluderdeluded you concerning God.
15.Therefore today no ransom shall be taken from you, neither from those whodisbelieved.Your refuge is the Fire, that is your master and evilhomecoming!'16.Is it not time that the hearts of those who believe should be humbled to theRemembrance of God and the Truth which He has sent down, and that they shouldnot be as those to whom the Book was given aforetime, and the term seemedover long to them, so that their hearts have become hard, and many of themare ungodly?
17.Know that God revives the earth after it was dead.We have indeed made clearfor you the signs, that haply you will understand.
18.Surely those, the men and the women, who make freewill offerings and havelent to God a good loan, it shall be multiplied for them, and theirs shall bea generous wage.
%540% 19.And those who believe in God and His Messengers--they are the just menand the martyrs in their Lord's sight; they have their wage, and their light.But the unbelievers, who have cried lies to Our signs, they are theinhabitants of Hell.
20.Know that the present life is but a sport and a diversion, an adornmentand a cause for boasting among you, and a rivalry in wealth and children.It is as a rain whose vegetation pleases the unbelievers; then it withers,and thou seest it turning yellow, then it becomes broken orts.And in theworld to come there is a terrible chastisement, and forgiveness from God andgood pleasure; and the present life is but the joy of delusion.
21.Race to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden the breadth whereof isas the breadth of heaven and earth, made ready for those who believe inGod and His Messengers.That is the bounty of God; He gives it untowhomsoever He will; and God is of bounty abounding.
22.No affliction befalls in the earth or in yourselves, but it is in aBook, before We create it; that is easy for God;
23.that you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor rejoice in what hascome to you; God loves not any man proud and boastful,
24.such as are niggardly, and bid men to be niggardly.And whosoeverturns away, God is the All-sufficient, the All-laudable.
%541% 25.Indeed, We sent Our Messengers with the clear signs, and We sent downwith them the Book and the Balance so that men might uphold justice.And We sent down iron, wherein is great might, and many uses for men,and so that God might know who helps Him, and His Messengers,in the Unseen.Surely God is All-strong, All-mighty.
26.And We sent Noah, and Abraham, and We appointed the Prophecy and the Book tobe among their seed; and some of them are guided, and many of them areungodly.
27.Then We sent, following in their footsteps, Our Messengers; and We sent,following, Jesus son of Mary, and gave unto him the Gospel.And We set in the hearts of those who followed him tenderness and mercy.And monasticism they invented--We did not prescribe it for them--onlyseeking the good pleasure of God; but they observed it not as it should beobserved.So We gave those of them who believed their wage; and many ofthem are ungodly.
28.O believers, fear God, and believe in His Messenger, and He will give youa twofold portion of His mercy, and He will appoint for you a light wherebyyou shall walk, and forgive you; God isAll-forgiving, All-compassionate;
29.that the People of the Book may know that they have no power over anythingof God's bounty, and that bounty is in the hand of God; He gives it untowhomsoever He will; and God is of bounty abounding.
%542% <58,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.God has heard the words of her that disputes pleads with thee concerningher husband, and makes complaint unto God.God hears the two of youconversing together; surely God is All-hearing, All-seeing.
2.Those of you who say, regarding their wives, `Be as my mother's back,' theyare not truly their mothers; their mothers are only those who gave them birth,and they are surely saying a dishonourable saying, and a falsehood.Yet surely God is All-pardoning, All-forgiving.
3.And those who say, regarding their wives, `Be as my mother's back,' and thenretract what they have said, they shall set free a slave, before the two ofthem touch one another.By that you are admonished; and God is aware of thethings you do.
4.But whosoever finds not the means, then let him fast two successive months,before the two of them touch one another.And if any man is not able to,then let him feed sixty poor persons--that, that you may believe in God andHis Messenger.Those are God's bounds; and for the unbelievers there awaitsyet a painful chastisement.
5.Surely those who oppose God and His Messenger shall be frustrated as thosebefore them were frustrated.Now We have sent down signs, clear signs; andfor the unbelievers awaits a humbling chastisement,
6.upon the day when God shall raise them up all together, then He shall tellthem what they did.God has numbered it, and they have forgotten it.God is witness over everything.
%543% 7.Hast thou not seen that God knows whatsoever is in the heavens, and whatsoeveris in the earth? There men conspire not secretly together, but He is thefourth of them, neither five men, but He is the sixth of them, neither fewerthan that, neither more, but He is with them, wherever they may be; then Heshall tell them what they have done, on the Day of Resurrection.Surely Godhas knowledge of everything.
8.Hast thou not regarded those who were forbidden to converse secretly together,then they return to that they were forbidden, and they converse secretlytogether in sin and enmity, and in disobedience to the Messenger? Then, whenthey come to thee, they greet thee with a greeting God never greeted theewithal; and they say within themselves, `Why does God not chastise us forwhat we say?' Sufficient for them shall be Gehenna Hell., at which theyshall be roasted--an evil homecoming!
9.O believers, when you conspire secretly, then conspire not together in sinand enmity and disobedience to the Messenger, but conspire in piety andgodfearing.Fear God, unto whom you shall be mustered.
10.Conspiring secretly together is of Satan, that the believers may sorrow; buthe will not hurt them anything, except by the leave of God.And in God letthe believers put all their trust.
11.O believers, when it is said to you `Make room in the assemblies', thenmake room, and God will make room for you; and when it is said, `Move up',move up, and God will raise up in rank those of you who believe and havebeen given knowledge.And God is aware of the things you do.
%544% 12.O believers, when you conspire with the Messenger, before your conspiringadvance a freewill offering; that is better for you and purer.Yet if youfind not means, God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
13.Are you afraid, before your conspiring,to advance freewill offerings? If you do not so, and God turns again untoyou, then perform the prayer, and pay the alms, and obey God and HisMessenger.God is aware of the things you do.
14.Hast thou not regarded those who have taken for friends a people against whomGod is wrathful? They belong neither to you nor to them; and they swear uponfalsehood, and that wittingly.
15.God has made ready for them a chastisement terrible; surely they--evil arethe things they have been doing.
16.They have taken their oaths as a covering, and barred from God's way, sothere awaits them a humbling chastisement.
17.Neither their riches nor their children shall avail them anything againstGod; those--they are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein dwelling forever.
18.Upon the day when God shall raise them up all together, and they will swearto Him, as they swear to you, and think they are on something.Surely, theyare the liars!
19.Satan has gained the mastery over them, and caused them to forget God'sRemembrance.Those are Satan's party; why, Satan's party, surely, they arethe losers!
20.Surely those who oppose God and His Messenger, those are among the mostabject.
21.God has written, `I shall assuredly be the victor, I and My Messengers.'Surely God is All-strong, All-mighty.
%545% 22.Thou shalt not find any people who believe in God and the Last Day who areloving to anyone who opposes God and His Messenger, not though they weretheir fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their clan.Those--Hehas written faith upon their hearts, and He has confirmed them with a Spiritfrom Himself; and He shall admit them into gardens underneath which riversflow, therein to dwell forever, God being well-pleased with them, and theywell-pleased with Him.Those are God's party; why, surely God's party--theyare the prosperers.
<59,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God; He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
2.It is He who expelled from their habitations the unbelievers among the Peopleof the Book at the first mustering.You did not think that they would goforth, and they thought that their fortresses would defend them against God;then God came upon them from whence they had not reckoned, and He cast terrorinto their hearts as they destroyed their houses with their own hands, andthe hands of the believers; therefore take heed, you who have eyes!
3.Had God not prescribed dispersal for them, He would have chastised them inthis world; and there awaits them in the world to come the chastisement ofthe Fire.
%546% 4.That is because they made a breach with God and His Messenger; and whosoevermakes a breach with God, God is terrible in retribution.
5.Whatever palm-trees you cut down, or left standing upon their roots, that wasby God's leave, and that He might degrade the ungodly.
6.And whatever spoils of war God has given unto His Messenger from them,against that you pricked neither horse nor camel; but God gives authority toHis Messengers over whomsoever He will.God is powerful over everything.
7.Whatsoever spoils of war God has given to His Messenger from the people ofthe cities belongs to God, and His Messenger, and the near kinsman, orphans,the needy and the traveller, so that it be not a thing taken in turns amongthe rich of you.Whatever the Messenger gives you, take; whatever he forbidsyou, give over.And fear God; surely God is terrible in retribution.
8.It is for the poor emigrants, who were expelled from their habitations andtheir possessions, seeking bounty from God and good pleasure, and helping Godand His Messenger; those--they are the truthful ones.
9.And those who made their dwelling in the abode, and in belief, before them,love whosoever has emigrated to them, not finding in their breasts any needfor what they have been given, and preferring others above themselves, eventhough poverty be their portion.And whoso is guarded against the avariceof his own soul, those--they are the prosperers.
%547% 10.And as for those who came after them, they say, `Our Lord, forgive us and ourbrothers, who preceded us in belief, and put Thou not into our hearts anyrancour towards those who believe.Our Lord, surely Thou art the All-gentle,the All-compassionate.'
11.Hast thou not regarded the hypocrites, saying to their brothers of the Peopleof the Book who disbelieve, `If you are expelled, we will go forth with you,and we will never obey anyone in regard to you.If you fought against,we will help you.' And God bears witness that they are truly liars.
12.If those are expelled, they will not go forth with them, and if they arefought against, they will not help them.Even if they helped them, they wouldsurely turn their backs, then they would not be helped.
13.Why, you arouse greater fear in their hearts than God; that is because theyare a people who understand not.
14.They will not fight against you all together except in fortified cities, orfrom behind walls.Their valour is great, among themselves; you think of them as a host; buttheir hearts are scattered, that is because they are a people who have nosense.
15.Like those who a short time before them tasted the mischief of their action;there awaits them a painful chastisement.
16.Like Satan, when he said to man, `Disbelieve'; then, when he disbelieved, hesaid, `Surely I am quit of you.Surely I fear God, the Lord of all Being.'
%548% 17.Their end is, both are in the Fire, there dwelling forever; that is therecompense of the evildoers.
18.O believers, fear God.Let every soul consider what it has forwarded for themorrow.And fear God; God is aware of the things you do.
19.Be not as those who forgot God, and so He caused them to forget their souls;those--they are the ungodly.
20.Not equal are the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise.The inhabitants of Paradise--they are the triumphant.
21.If We had sent down this Koran upon a mountain, thou wouldst have seen ithumbled, split asunder out of the fear of God.And those similitudes--Westrike them for men; haply they will reflect.
22.He is God; there is no god but He.He is the knower of the Unseen and theVisible; He is the All-merciful, the All - compassionate.
23.He is God; there is no god but He.He is the King, the All-holy, theAll-peaceable, the All-faithful, the All-preserver, the All-mighty, theAll-compeller, the All-sublime.Glory be to God, above that they associate!
24.He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Shaper.To Him belong the Names MostBeautiful.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies Him; He is theAll-mighty, the All-wise.
%549% <60,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O believers, take not My enemy and your enemy for friends, offering them love,though they have disbelieved in the truth that has come to you, expelling theMessenger and you because you believe in God your Lord.If you go forth tostruggle in My way and seek My good pleasure, secretly loving them, yet Iknow very well what you conceal and what you publish; and whosoever of youdoes that, has gone astray from the right way.
2.If they come on you, they will be enemies to you, and stretch against youtheir hands and their tongues, to do you evil, and they wish that you maydisbelieve.
3.Neither your blood-kindred nor your children shall profit you upon the Day ofResurrection; He shall distinguish between you.And God sees the things youdo.
4.You have had a good example in Abraham, and those with him, when they said totheir people, `We are quit of you and that you serve, apart from God.Wedisbelieve in you, and between us and you enmity has shown itself, and hatredfor ever, until you believe in God alone.' Except that Abraham said unto hisfather, `Certainly I shall ask pardon for thee; but I have no power to doaught for thee against God.' `Our Lord, in Thee we trust, to Thee we turn;to Thee is the homecoming.
5.Our Lord, make us not a temptation to those who disbelieve; and forgive us.Our Lord, Thou art the All-mighty, the All-wise.'
%550% 6.You have had a good example in them for whomever hopes for God and the LastDay.And whosoever turns away, surely God is the All-sufficient, theAll-laudable.
7.It may be God will yet establish between you and those of them with whom youare at enmity love.God is All-powerful; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
8.God forbids you not, as regards those who have not fought you in religion'scause, nor expelled you from your habitations, that you should be kindly tothem, and act justly towards them; surely God loves the just.
9.God only forbids you as to those who have fought you in religion's cause, andexpelled you from your habitations, and have supported in your expulsion,that you should take them for friends.And whosoever takes them for friends,those--they are the evildoers.
10.O believers, when believing women come to you as emigrants, test them.Godknows very well their belief.Then, if you know them to be believers, returnthem not to the unbelievers.They are not permitted to the unbelievers, norare the unbelievers permitted to them.Give the unbelievers what they haveexpended; and there is no fault in you to marry them when you have given themtheir wages.Do not hold fast to the ties of unbelieving women, and ask whatyou have expended, and let them ask what they have expended.That is God'sjudgment; He judges between you; and God is All-knowing, All-wise.
11.And if any of your wives slips away from you to the unbelievers, and then youretaliate, give those whose wives have gone away the like of what they haveexpended.And fear God, in whom you believe.
%551% 12.O Prophet, when believing women come to thee, swearing fealty to thee uponthe terms that they will not associate with God anything, and will not steal,neither commit adultery, nor slay their children, nor bring a calumny theyforge between their hands and their feet, nor disobey thee in aughthonourable, ask God's forgiveness for them; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
13.O believers, take not for friends a people against whom God is wrathful, andwho have despaired of the world to come, even as the unbelievers havedespaired of the inhabitants of the tombs.
<61,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God; He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
2.O you who believe, wherefore do you say what you do not?
3.Very hateful is it to God, that you say what you do not.
4.God loves those who fight in His way in ranks, as though they were a buildingwell-compacted.
5.And when Moses said to his people, `O my people, why do you hurt me, thoughyou know I am the Messenger of God to you?' When they swerved, God causedtheir hearts to swerve; and God guides never the people of theungodly.
%552% 6.And when Jesus son of Mary said, `Children of Israel, I am indeed theMessenger of God to you, confirming the Torah that is before me, and givinggood tidings of a Messenger who shall come after me, whose name shall beAhmad.'
7.Then, when he brought them the clear signs, they said, `This is amanifest sorcery.' And who does greater evil than he who forges against Godfalsehood, when he is being called unto surrender? And God guides never thepeople of the evildoers.
8.They desire to extinguish with their mouths the light of God; but God willperfect His light, though the unbelievers be averse.
9.It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion oftruth, that he may uplift it above every religion, though the unbelievers beaverse.
10.O believers, shall I direct you to a commerce that shall deliver you froma painful chastisement?
11.You shall believe in God and His Messenger, and struggle in the way of Godwith your possessions and your selves.That is better for you, did you butknow.
12.He will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens underneath whichrivers flow, and to dwelling-places goodly in Gardens of Eden; that isthe mighty triumph;
13.and other things you love, help from God and a nigh victory.Give thou goodtidings to the believers!
14.O believers, be you God's helpers, as Jesus, Mary's son, said to theApostles.' Who will be my helpers unto God?' The Apostles said, `We will behelpers of God.'And a party of the Children of Israel believed, and a party disbelieved.SoWe confirmed those who believed against their enemy, and they becamemasters.
%553% <62,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God, the King, theAll-holy, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
2.It is He who has raised up from among the common people a Messenger fromamong them, to recite His signs to them and to purity them, and to teachthem the Book and the Wisdom, though before that they were in manifesterror,
3.and others of them who have not yet joined them.And He is the All-mighty,the All-wise.
4.That is the bounty of God; He gives it to whom He will, and God is of bountyabounding.
5.The likeness of those who have been loaded with the Torah, then they have notcarried it, is as the likeness of an ass carrying books.Evil is the likenessof the people who have cried lies to God's signs.God guides never the peopleof the evildoers.
6.Say: `You of Jewry, if you assert that you are the friends of God, apart fromother men, then do you long for death, if you speak truly.'
7.But they will never long for it, because of that their hands have forwarded;God knows the evildoers.
8.Say: `Surely death, from which you flee, shall encounter you; then you shallbe returned to the Knower of the Unseen and the Visible, and He will tell youthat you have been doing.'
%554% 9.O believers, when proclamation is made for prayer on the Day of Congregation,hasten to God's remembrance and leave trafficking aside; that is better foryou, did you but know.
10.Then, when the prayer is finished, scatter in the land and seek God's bounty,and remember God frequently; haply you will prosper.
11.But when they see merchandise or diversion they scatter off to it, and theyleave thee standing.Say: `What is with God is better than diversion andmerchandise.God is the best of providers.'
<63,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When the hypocrites come to thee they say, `We bear witness that thou artindeed the Messenger of God.' And God knows that thou art indeed HisMessenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are truly liars.
2.They have taken their oaths as a covering, then they have barred from the wayof God.Surely they--evil are the things they have been doing.
3.That is because they have believed, then they have disbelieved; therefore aseal has been set on their hearts, and they do not understand.
4.When thou seest them, their bodies please thee; but when they speak, thoulistenest to their speech, and it is as they were propped-up timbers.Theythink every cry is against them.They are the enemy; so beware of them.Godassail them! How they are perverted!
%555% 5.And when it is said to them, `Come now, and God's Messenger will askforgiveness for you,' they twist their heads, and thou seest them turningtheir faces away, waxing proud.
6.Equal it is for them, whether thou askest forgiveness for them or thou askestnot forgiveness for them; God will never forgive them.God guides not thepeople of the ungodly.
7.Those are they that say, `Do not expend on them that are with God's Messengeruntil they scatter off'; yet unto God belong the treasuries of the heavensand of the earth, but the hypocrites do not understand.
8.They say, `If we return to the City, the mightier ones of it will expelthe more abased'; yet glory belongs unto God, and unto His Messengerand the believers, but the hypocrites do not know it.
9.O believers, let not your possessions neither your children divert you fromGod's remembrance; whoso does that, they are the losers.
10.Expend of what We have provided you before that death comes upon one of youand he says, `O my Lord, if only Thou wouldst defer me unto a near term, sothat I may make freewill offering, and so I may become one of therighteous.'
11.But God will never defer any soul when its term comes.And God is aware ofthe things you do.
%556% <64,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God.His is the Kingdom,and His is the praise, and He is powerful over everything.
2.It is He who created you.One of you is an unbeliever, and one of you abeliever; and God sees the things you do.
3.He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and He shaped you, andshaped you well; and unto Him is the homecoming.
4.He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what youconceal and what you publish.God knows the thoughts within the breasts.
5.Has there not come to you the tidings of those that disbelieved before, thentasted the mischief of their action, and there yet awaits them a painfulchastisement?
6.That is because their Messengers came to them with the clear signs, and thenthey said, `What, shall mortals be our guides?' Therefore they disbelieved,and turned away; and God was in no need of them.And God is All-sufficient,All-laudable.
7.The unbelievers assert that they will never be raised up.Say: `Yes indeed,by my Lord! You shall be raised up, then you shall be told the things youdid.That is easy for God.'
8.Therefore believe in God and His Messenger, and in the Light which We havesent down.And God is aware of the things you do.
9.Upon the day when He shall gather you for the Day of Gathering; that shallbe the Day of Mutual Fraud.And whosoever believes in God, and doesrighteousness, God will acquit him of his evil deeds, and admit him intogardens underneath which rivers flow, therein to dwell for ever and ever;that is the mighty triumph.
%557% 10.And those who disbelieved and cried lies to Our signs, those shall be theinhabitants of the Fire.therein to dwell forever--and evilhomecoming!
11.No affliction befalls, except it be by the leave of God.Whosoever believesin God, He will guide his heart.And God has knowledge of everything.
12.And obey God, and obey the Messenger; but if you turn your backs, it is onlyfor the Messenger to deliver the Manifest Message .
13.God--there is no god but He.And in God let the believers put their trust.
14.O believers, among your wives and children there is an enemy to you; sobeware of them.But if you pardon, and overlook, and if you forgive, surelyGod is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
15.Your wealth and your children are only a trial; and with God is a mightywage.
16.So fear God as far as you are able, and give ear, and obey, and expendwell for yourselves.And whosoever is guarded against the avariceof his own soul, those--they are the prosperers.
17.If you lend to God a good loan, He will multiply it for you, and will forgiveyou.God is All-thankful, All-clement,
18.Knower He of the Unseen and the Visible, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
%558% <65,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O Prophet, when you divorce women, divorce them when they have reached theirperiod.Count the period, and fear God your Lord.Do not expel them fromtheir houses, nor let them go forth, except when they commit a flagrantindecency.Those are God's bounds; whosoever trespasses the bounds of Godhas done wrong to himself.Thou knowest not, perchance after that God willbring something new to pass.
2.Then, when they have reached their term, retain them honourably, or part fromthem honourably.And call in to witness two men of equity from amongyourselves; and perform the witnessing to God Himself.By this then isadmonished whosoever believes in God and the Last Day.And whosoever fearsGod, He will appoint for him a way out,
3.and He will provide for him from whence he never reckoned.And whosoever putshis trust in God, He shall suffice him.God attains his purpose. God hasappointed a measure for everything.
4.As for your women who have despaired of further menstruating, if you are indoubt, their period shall be three months, and those who have not menstruatedas yet.And those who are with child, their term is when they bring forththeir burden.Whoso fears God, God will appoint for him, of His command,easiness.
5.That is God's command, that He has sent down unto you.And whosoever fearsGod, He will acquit him of his evil deeds, and He will give him amighty wage.
%559% 6.Lodge them where you are lodging, according to your means, and do not pressthem, so as to straiten their circumstances.If they are with child, expendupon them until they bring forth their burden.If they suckle for you, givethem their wages, and consult together honourably.If you both makedifficulties, another woman shall suckle for him.
7.Let the man of plenty expend out of his plenty.As for him whose provisionis stinted to him, let him expend of what God has given him.God charges nosoul save with what He has given him.God will assuredly appoint, afterdifficulty, easiness.
8.How many a city turned in disdain from the commandment of its Lord and HisMessengers; and then We made with it a terrible reckoning and chastised itwith a horrible chastisement.
9.So it tasted the mischief of its action, and the end of its affair was loss.
10.God prepared for them a terrible chastisement.So fear God, O men Possessedof minds! Believers, God has sent down to you, for aremembrance,
11.a Messenger reciting to you the signs of God, clear signs, that He may bringforth those who believe and do righteous deeds from the shadows into thelight.Whosoever believes in God, and does righteousness, He will admit himto gardens underneath which rivers flow; therein they shall dwell for ever andever.God has made for him a goodly provision.
12.It is God who created seven heavens, and of earth their like, between themthe Command descending, that you may know that God is powerful overeverything and that God encompasses everything in knowledge.
%560% <66,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O Prophet, why forbiddest thou what God has made lawful to thee, seeking thegood pleasure of thy wives? And God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
2.God has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths.God is your Protector,and He is the All-knowing, the All-wise.
3.And when the Prophet confided to one of his wives a certain matter; and then,when she told of it, and God disclosed that to him, he made known part of it,and turned aside from part; then, when he told her of it, she said, `Who toldthee this?' He said, `I was told of it by the All-knowing, the All-aware.'
4.If you two repent to God, yet your hearts certainly inclined; but if yousupport one another against him, God is his Protector, and Gabriel, and therighteous among the believers; and, after that, the angels are hissupporters.
5.It is possible that, if he divorces you, his Lord will give him in exchangewives better than you, women who have surrendered, believing, obedient,penitent, devout, given to fasting, who have been married and virginstoo.
6.Believers, guard yourselves and your families against a Fire whose fuel ismen and stones, and over which are harsh, terrible angels who disobey not Godin what He commands them and do what they are commanded.
7.`O you unbelievers , do not excuse yourselves today; you are only beingrecompensed for what you were doing.'
%561% 8.Believers, turn to God in sincere repentance; it may be that your Lord willacquit you of your evil deeds, and will admit you into gardens underneathwhich rivers flow.Upon the day when God will not degrade the Prophet andthose who believe with him , their light running before them, and on theirright hands; and they say, `Our Lord, perfect for us our light, and forgiveus; surely Thou art powerful over everything.'
9.O Prophet, struggle with the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be thou harshwith them; their refuge shall be Gehenna--an evil homecoming!
10.God has struck a similitude for the unbelievers--the wife of Noah, and thewife of Lot; for they were under the care of two of Our righteous servants,but they betrayed them, so they availed them nothing whatsoever against God;so it was said, `Enter, you two, the Fire with those who enter.'
11.God has struck a similitude for the believers--the wife of Pharaoh, when shesaid, `My Lord, build for me a house in Paradise, in Thy presence, and deliverme from Pharaoh and his work, and do Thou deliver me from the people of theevildoers.'
12.And Mary, Imran's daughter, who guarded her virginity, so We breathed into herof Our Spirit, and she confirmed the Words of her Lord and His Books, andbecame one of the obedient.
%562% <67,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Blessed be He in whose hand is the Kingdom--He is powerful over everything--
2.Who created death and life, that He might try you which of you is fairest inworks; and He is the All-mighty, the All-forgiving--
3.who created seven heavens one upon another.Thou seest not in the creationof the All-merciful any imperfection.Return thy gaze; seest thou anyfissure?
4.Then return thy gaze again, and again, and thy gaze comes back to theedazzled, aweary.
5.And We adorned the lower heaven with lamps, and made them things to stoneSatans; and We have prepared for them the chastisement of theBlaze.
6.And for those who disbelieve in their Lord there awaits the chastisement ofGehenna--an evil homecoming!
7.When they are cast into it they will hear it sighing, the while it boilsand wellnigh bursts asunder with rage.
8.As often as a troop is cast into it, its keepers ask them, `Come there nowarner to you?'
9.They say, `Yes indeed, a warner came to us; but we cried lies, saying, "Godhas not sent down anything; you are only in great error." '
10.They also say, `If we had only heard, or had understood, we would not havebeen of the inhabitants of the Blaze.'
11.So they confess their sins.Curse the inhabitants of the Blaze!
12.Surely those who fear their Lord in the Unseen--there awaits them forgivenessand a great wage.
%563% 13.Be secret in your speech, or proclaim it, He knows the thoughts within thebreasts.
14.Shall He not know, who created? And He is the All-subtle, the All-aware.
15.It is He who made the earth submissive to you; therefore walk in its tracts,and eat of His provision; to Him is the Uprising.
16.Do you feel secure that He who is in heaven will not cause the earth toswallow you, the while it rocks?
17.Do you feel secure that He who is in heaven will not loose against you asquall of pebbles, then you shall know how My warning Is?
18.Those that were before them also cried lies; then how was My horror!
19.Have they not regarded the birds above them spreading their wings, and closingthem? Naught holds them but the All-merciful.Surely He sees everything.
20.Or who is this that shall be a host for you to help you, apart from theAll-merciful? The unbelievers are only in delusion.
21.Or who is this that shall provide for you if He withholds His provision? No,but they persist in disdain and aversion.
22.What, is he who walks prone upon his face better guided than he who walksupright on a straight path?
23.Say: `It is He who produced you, and appointed for you hearing and sight andhearts; little thanks you show!'
24.Say: `It is He who scattered you in the earth, and unto Him you shall bemustered.'
25.They say, `When shall this promise come to pass, if you speaktruly?
26.Say: `The knowledge is with God; I am only a clear warner.'
%564% 27.Then, when they see it nigh at hand, the faces of the unbelievers will bevexed, and it will be said, `This is what you were promised.'
28.Say: `What think you? If God destroys me and those with me, or has mercy onus, then who will protect the unbelievers from a painful chastisement?'
29.Say: `He is the All-merciful.We believe in Him, and in Him we put all ourtrust.Assuredly, you will soon know who is in manifest error.'
30.Say: `What think you? If in the morning your water should have vanished intothe earth, then who would bring you running water?'
<68,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.NunBy the Pen, and what they inscribe,
2.thou art not, by the blessing of thy Lord, a man possessed.
3.Surely thou shalt have a wage unfailing;
4.surely thou art upon a mighty morality.
5.So thou shalt see, and they will see,
6.which of you is the demented.
7.Surely thy Lord knows very well those who have gone astray from His way, andHe knows very well those who are guided.
8.So obey thou not those who cry lies.
9.They wish that thou shouldst compromise, then they would compromise.
10.And obey thou not every mean swearer,
11.backbiter, going about with slander,
12.hinderer of good, guilty aggressor,
13.coarse-grained, moreover ignoble,
14.because he has wealth and sons.
15.When Our signs are recited to him, he says, `Fairy-tales of theancients!'
%565% 16.We shall brand him upon the muzzle!
17.Now We have tried them, even as We tried the owners of the garden when theyswore they would pluck in the morning
18.and they added not the saving words.
19.Then a visitation from thy Lord visited it, while they were sleeping,
20.and in the morning it was as if it were a garden plucked.
21.In the morning they called to one another,
22.`Come forth betimes upon your tillage, if you would pluck!'
23.So they departed, whispering together,
24.`No needy man shall enter it today against your will.'
25.And they went forth early, determined upon their purpose.
26.But when they saw it, they said, `Surely we are gone astray;
27.nay, rather we have been robbed!'
28.Said the most moderate of them, `Did I not say to you, "Why do younot give glory?" '
29.They said, `Glory be to God, our Lord; truly, we were evildoers.'
30.And they advanced one upon another, blaming each other.
31.They said, `Woe, alas for us! Truly, we were insolent.
32.It may be that our Lord will give us in exchange a better than it; to ourLord we humbly turn.'
33.Such is the chastisement; and the chastisement of the world to come isassuredly greater, did they but know.
34.Surely for the godfearing shall be Gardens of Bliss with their Lord.
35.What, shall we make those who have surrendered like to thesinners?
36.What ails you then, how you judge?
37.Or have you a Book wherein you study?
38.Surely therein you shall have whatever you choose!
39.Or have you oaths from Us, reaching to the Day of Resurrection? Surely youshall have whatever you judge!
40.Ask them, which of them will guarantee that!
41.Or do they have associates? Then let them bring their associates, if theyspeak truly.
42.Upon the day when the leg shall be bared, and they shall be summoned to bowthemselves, but they cannot;
%566% 43.humbled shall be their eyes, and abasement shall overspread them, for theyhad been summoned to bow themselves while they were whole.
44.So leave Me with him who cries lies to this discourse! We will draw them onlittle by little whence they know not;
45.and I shall respite them--assuredly My guile is sure.
46.Or askest thou them for a wage, and so they are weighed down with debt?
47.Or is the Unseen in their keeping, and so they are writing it down?
48.So be thou patient under the judgment of thy Lord, and be not as the Man ofthe Fish, when he called, choking inwardly.
49.Had there not overtaken him a blessing from his Lord he would have been castupon the wilderness, being condemned.
50.But his Lord had chosen him, and He placed him among therighteous.
51.The unbelievers wellnigh strike thee down with their glances, when they hearthe Reminder, and they say, `Surely he is a man possessed!'
52.And it is nothing but a Reminder unto all beings.
<69,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The Indubitable!
2.What is the Indubitable?
3.And what will teach thee what is the Indubitable?
4.Thamood and Ad cried lies to the Clatterer.
5.As for Thamood, they were destroyed by the Screamerthunderstorm.;
6.and as for Ad, they were destroyed by a wind clamorous, violent
7.that He compelled against them seven nights and eight days, uninterruptedly,and thou mightest see the people laid prostrate in it as if they were thestumps of fallen down palm-trees.
8.Now dost thou see any remnant of them?
%567% 9.Pharaoh likewise, and those before him, and the Subverted Cities--theycommitted error,
10.and they rebelled against the Messenger of their Lord, and He seized themwith a surpassing grip.
11.Lo, when the waters rose, We bore you in the running ship
12.that We might make it a reminder for you and for heeding ears to hold.
13.So, when the Trumpet is blown with a single blast
14.and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow,
15.then, on that day, the Terror shall come to pass,
16.and heaven shall be split, for upon that day it shall be very frail,
17.and the angels shall stand upon its borders, and upon that day eight shallcarry above them the Throne of thy Lord.
18.On that day you shall be exposed, not one secret of yours concealed.
19.Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he shall say, `Here,take and read my book!
20.Certainly I thought that I should encounter my reckoning.'
21.So he shall be in a pleasing life
22.in a lofty Garden,
23.its clusters nigh to gather.
24.`Eat and drink with wholesome appetite for that you did long ago, in the daysgone by.'
25.But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he shall say, `Wouldthat I had not been given my book
26.and not known my reckoning!
27.Would it had been the end!
28.My wealth has not availed me,
29.my authority is gone from me.'
30.`Take him, and fetter him,
31.and then roast him in Hell,
32.then in a chain of seventy cubits' length insert him!
33.Behold, he never believed in God the All-mighty,
34.and he never urged the feeding of the needy;
%568% 35.therefore he today has not here one loyal friend,
36.neither any food saving foul pus,
37.that none excepting the sinners eat.'
38.No! I swear by that you see
39.and by that you do not see,
40.it is the speech of a noble Messenger.
41.It is not the speech of a poet, little do you believe
42.nor the speech of a soothsayer, little do you remember.
43.A sending down from the Lord of all Being.
44.Had he invented against Us any sayings,
45.We would have seized him by the right hand,
46.then We would surely have cut his life-vein
47.and not one of you could have defended him.
48.Surely it is a Reminder to the godfearing;
49.but We know that some of you will cry lies.
50.Surely it is a sorrow to the unbelievers;
51.yet indeed it is the truth of certainty.
52.Then magnify the Name of thy Lord, the All-mighty.
<70,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.A questioner asked of a chastisement about to fall
2.for the unbelievers, which none may avert,
3.from God, the Lord of the Stairways.
4.To Him the angels and the Spirit mount up in a day whereof the measure isfifty thousand years.
5.So be thou patient with a sweet patience;
6.behold, they see it as if far off,
7.but We see it is nigh.
8.Upon the day when heaven shall be as molten copper
9.and the mountains shall be as plucked wool-tufts,
10.no loyal friend shall question loyal friend,
%569% 11.as they are given sight of them.The sinner will wish that he might ransomhimself from the chastisement of that day even by his sons,
12.his companion wife, his brother,
13.his kin who sheltered him,
14.and whosoever is in the earth, all together, so that then it might deliverhim.
15.Nay, verily it is a furnace
16.snatching away the scalp,
17.calling him who drew back and turned away,
18.who amassed and hoarded.
19.Surely man was created fretful,
20.when evil visits him, impatient,
21.when good visits him, grudging,
22.save those that pray
23.and continue at their prayers,
24.those in whose wealth is a right known
25.for the beggar and the outcast,
26.who confirm the Day of Doom
27.and go in fear of the chastisement of their Lord
28.from their Lord's chastisement none feels secure
29.and guard their private parts
30.save from their wives and what their right hands own, then not beingblameworthy
31.but whoso seeks after more than that, they are the transgressors,
32.and who preserve their trusts and their covenant,
33.and perform their witnessings,
34.and who observe their prayers.
35.Those shall be in Gardens, high-honoured.
36.What ails the unbelievers, running with outstretched necks towards thee
37.on the right hand and on the left hand in knots crowds.?
38.What, is every man of them eager to be admitted to a Garden of Bliss?
39.Not so; for We have created them of what they know.
%570% 40.No! I swear by the Lord of the Easts and Wests, surely We are able
41.to substitute a better than they; We shall not be outstripped.
42.Then leave them alone to plunge and play until they encounter that day oftheirs which they are promised,
43.the day they shall come forth from the tombs hastily, as if they were hurryingunto a waymark,
44.humbled their eyes, overspreading them abasement.That is the daywhich they were promised.
<71,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.We sent Noah to his people, saying, `Warn thy people, ere there come on thema painful chastisement.'
2.He said, `O my people, I am unto you a clear warner,
3.saying, "Serve God, and fear Him, and obey you me,
4.and He will forgive you your sins, and defer you to a stated term; God's term,when it comes, cannot be deferred, did you but know" '
5.He said, `My Lord, I have called my people by night and by day,
6.but my calling has only increased them in flight.
7.And whenever I called them, that Thou mightest forgive them, they put theirfingers in their ears, and wrapped them in their garments, and persisted, andwaxed very proud.
8.Then indeed I called them openly;
9.then indeed I spoke publicly unto them, and I spoke unto them secretly,
10.and I said, "Ask you forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is everAll-forgiving,
%571% 11.and He will loose heaven upon you in torrents
12.and will succour you with wealth and sons, and will appoint for you gardens,and will appoint for you rivers.
13.What ails you, that you look not for majesty in God,
14.seeing He created you by stages?
15.Have you not regarded how God created seven heavens one uponanother,
16.and set the moon therein for a light and the sun for a lamp?
17.And God caused you to grow out of the earth,
18.then He shall return you into it, and bring you forth.
19.And God has laid the earth for you as a carpet,
20.that thereof you may thread ways, ravines." '
21.Noah said, `My Lord, they have rebelled against me, and followed him whosewealth and children increase him only in loss,
22.and have devised a mighty device
23.and have said, " Do not leave your gods, and do not leave Wadd, nor Suwa',Yaghuth, Ya'uq, neither Nasr."
24.And they have led many astray.Increase Thou not the evildoers save inerror!'
25.And because of their transgressions they were drowned, and admitted into aFire, for they found not, apart from God, any to help them.
26.And Noah said, `My Lord, leave not upon the earth of the unbelieverseven one.
27.Surely, if Thou leavest them, they will lead Thy servants astray, and willbeget none but unbelieving libertines.
28.My Lord, forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as abeliever, and the believers, men and women alike; and do Thou not increasethe evildoers save in ruin!'
%572% <72,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Say: `It has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn gave ear, thenthey said, "We have indeed heard a Koran wonderful,
2.guiding to rectitude.We believe in it, and we will not associate with ourLord anyone.
3.He--exalted be our Lord's majesty!--has not taken to Himself either consortor a son.
4.The fool among us spoke against God outrage,
5.and we had thought that men and jinn would never speak against God alie.
6.But there were certain men of mankind who would take refuge with certain menof the jinn, and they increased them in vileness,
7.and they thought, even as you also thought, that God would never raise upanyone.
8.And we stretched towards heaven, but we found it filled with terrible guardsand meteors.
9.We would sit there on seats to hear; but any listening now finds a meteor inwait for him.
10.And so we know not whether evil is intended for those in the earth, orwhether their Lord intends for them rectitude.
11.And some of us are the righteous, and some of us are otherwise; we are sectsdiffering.
12.Indeed, we thought that we should never be able to frustrate God in theearth, neither be able to frustrate Him by flight.
13.When we heard the guidance, we believed in it; and whosoever believes in hisLord, he shall fear neither paltriness nor vileness.
%573% 14.And some of us have surrendered, and some of us have deviated.Those who have surrendered sought rectitude;
15.but as for those who have deviated, they have become firewood forGehenna Hell.!" '
16.Would they but go straight on the way, We would give them to drink of watercopious,
17.that We might try them therein.And whosoever turns away from theRemembrance of his Lord, He will thrust him into chastisement rigorous.
18.The places of worship belong to God; so call not, along with God, uponanyone.
19.When the servant of God stood calling on Him, they were wellnigh upon himin swarms.
20.Say: `I call only upon my Lord, and I do not associate with Himanyone.'
21.Say: `Surely I possess no power over you, either for hurt or forrectitude.'
22.Say: `From God shall protect me not anyone, and I shall find, apart from Him,no refuge,
23.excepting a Deliverance from God and His Messages.And whoso rebelsagainst God and His Messenger, for him there awaits the Fire ofGehenna; therein they shall dwell forever.'
24.Until, when they see that which they are promised, then they will knowwho is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers.
25.Say: `I do not know whether that which you are promised is nigh, orwhether my Lord will appoint for it a space;
26.Knower He of the Unseen, and He discloses not His Unseen to anyone,
27.save only to such a Messenger as He is well-pleased with; then Hedespatches before him and behind him watchers,
28.that He may know they have delivered the Messages of their Lord; and Heencompasses all that is with them, and He has numbered everything innumbers.'
%574% <73,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O thou enwrapped in thy robes,
2.keep vigil the night, except a little
3.a half of it, or diminish a little,
4.or add a little, and chant the Koran very distinctly.
5.Behold, We shall cast upon thee a weighty word;
6.surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread, more upright inspeech,
7.surely in the day thou hast long business.
8.And remember the Name of thy Lord, and devote thyself unto Him very devoutly.
9.Lord of the East and the West; there is no god but He; so take Him for aGuardian.
10.And bear thou patiently what they say, and forsake themgraciously.
11.Leave Me to those who cry lies, those prosperous ones, and respite them alittle,
12.for with Us there are fetters, and a furnace,
13.and food that chokes, and a painful chastisement,
14.upon the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountainsbecome a slipping heap of sand.
15.Surely We have sent unto you a Messenger as a witness over you, even as Wesent to Pharaoh a Messenger,
16.but Pharaoh rebelled against the Messenger, so We seized him remorselessly.
17.If therefore you disbelieve, how will you guard yourselves against a day thatshall make the children grey-headed?
18.Whereby heaven shall be split, and its promise shall be performed.
19.Surely this is a Reminder; so let him who will take unto his Lord a way.
%575%20.Thy Lord knows that thou keepest vigil nearly two-thirds of the night, or ahalf of it, or a third of it, and a party of those with thee; and Goddetermines the night and the day.He knows that you will not number it, andHe has turned towards you.Therefore recite of the Koran so much as isfeasible.He knows that some of you are sick, and others journeying in theland, seeking the bounty of God, and others fighting in the way of God.Sorecite of it so much as is feasible.And perform the prayer, and pay thealms, and lend to God a good loan.Whatever good you shall forward to yoursouls' account, you shall find it with God as better, and mightier a wage.And ask God's forgiveness; God is All-forgiving,All-compassionate.
<74,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.O thou shrouded in thy mantle,
2.arise, and warn!
3.Thy Lord magnify
4.thy robes purify
5.and defilement flee!
6.Give not, thinking to gain greater
7.and be patient unto thy Lord.
8.For when the Trumpet is sounded
9.that day will be a harsh day,
10.for the unbelievers not easy.
11.Leave Me with him whom I created alone,
12.and appointed for him ample wealth
13.and sons standing before him,
14.and made all things smooth for him;
15.then he is eager that I should do more.
16.Nay! He is forward unto Our signs;
17.and I shall constrain him to a hard ascent.
%576%18.Lo! He reflected, and determined--
19.death seize him, how he determined!
20.Again, death seize him, how he determined!
21.Then he beheld,
22.then he frowned, and scowled,
23.then he retreated, and waxed proud.
24.He said, `This is naught but a trumped-up sorcery;
25.this is nothing but mortal speech.'
26.I shall surely roast him in Sakar;
27.and what will teach thee what is Sakar Hell.?
28.It spares not, neither leaves alone
29.scorching the flesh;
30.over it are nineteen.
31.We have appointed only angels to be masters of the Fire, and their numberWe have appointed only as a trial for the unbelievers, that those who weregiven the book may have certainty, and that those who believe may increasein belief, and that those who were given the Book and those who believe maynot be in doubt, and that those in whose hearts there is sickness, and theunbelievers, may say, `What did God intend by this as a similitude?' So Godleads astray whomsoever He will, and He guides whomsoever He will; and noneknows the hosts of thy Lord but He.And it is naught but a Reminder tomortals.
32.Nay! By the moon
33.and the night when it retreats
34.and the dawn when it is white,
35.surely it is one of the greatest things
36.as a warner to mortals,
37.to whoever of you desires to go forward or lag behind.
38.Every soul shall be pledged for what it has earned,
39.save the Companions of the Right;
40.in Gardens they will question
41.concerning the sinners,
42.`What thrusted you into Sakar Hell.?'
43.They shall say, `We were not of those who prayed,
44.and we fed not the needy,
45.and we plunged along with the plungers,
46.and we cried lies to the Day of Doom,
47.till the Certain came to us.'
%577%48.Then the intercession of the intercessors shall not profit them.
49.What ails them, that they turn away from the Reminder,
50.as if they were startled asses
51.fleeing before a lion?
52.Nay, every man of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled.
53.No indeed; but they do not fear the Hereafter.
54.No indeed; surely it is a Reminder;
55.so whoever wills shall remember it.
56.And they will not remember, except thatGod wills; He is worthy to be feared, worthy to forgive.
<75,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.No! I swear by the Day of Resurrection.
2.No! I swear by the reproachful soul.
3.What, does man reckon We shall not gather his bones?
4.Yes indeed; We are able to shape again his fingers.
5.Nay, but man desires to continue on as a libertine,
6.asking, `When shall be they Day of Resurrection?'
7.But when the sight is dazed
8.and the moon is eclipsed,
9.and the sun and moon are brought together,
10.upon that day man shall say, `Whither to flee?'
11.No indeed; not a refuge!
12.Upon that day the recourse shall be to thy Lord.
13.Upon that day man shall be told his former deeds and his latter;
14.nay, man shall be a clear proof against himself;
15.even though he offer his excuses.
16.Move not thy tongue with it to hasten it;
17.Ours it is to gather it, and to recite it.
18.So, when We recite it, follow thou its recitation.
19.Then Ours it is to explain it.
%578%20.No indeed; but you love the hasty world,
21.and leave be the Hereafter.
22.Upon that day faces shall be radiant,
23.gazing upon their Lord;
24.and upon that day faces shall be scowling,
25.thou mightest think the Calamity has been wreaked on them.
26.No indeed; when it reaches the clavicles
27.and it said, `Who is an enchanter?'
28.and he thinks that it is the parting
29.and leg is intertwined with leg,
30.upon that day unto thy Lord shall be the driving.
31.For he confirmed it not, and did not pray,
32.but he cried it lies, and he turned away,
33.then he went to his household arrogantly.
34.Nearer to thee and nearer
35.then nearer to thee and nearer!
36.What, does man reckon he shall be left to roam at will?
37.Was he not a sperm-drop spilled?
38.Then he was a blood-clot, and He created and formed,
39.and He made of him two kinds, male and female.
40.What, is He not able to quicken the dead?
<76,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Has there come on man a while of time when he was a thing unremembered?
2.We created man of a sperm-drop, a mingling, trying him; and We made himhearing, seeing.
3.Surely We guided him upon the way whether he be thankful or unthankful.
4.Surely We have prepared for the unbelievers chains, fetters, and a Blaze.
5.Surely the pious shall drink of acup whose mixture is camphor,
%579%6.a fountain whereat drink the servants of God, making it to gush forthplenteously.
7.They fulfil their wows, and fear a day whose evil is upon the wing;
8.they give food, for the love of Him, to the needy, the orphan, the captive:
9.`We feed you only for the Face of God; we desire no recompense from you, nothankfulness;
10.for we fear from our Lord a frowning day, inauspicious.'
11.So God has guarded them from the evil of that day, and has procured themradiancy and gladness,
12.and recompensed them for their patience with a Garden, and silk;
13.therein they shall recline upon couches, therein they shall see neither sunnor bitter cold;
14.near them shall be its shades, and its clusters hung meekly down,
15.and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver, and goblets ofcrystal,
16.crystal of silver that they have measured very exactly.
17.And therein they shall be given to drink a cup whose mixture is ginger,
18.therein a fountain whose name is called Salsabil.
19.Immortal youths shall go about them; when thou seest them, thou supposestthem scattered pearls,
20.when thou seest them then thou seest bliss and a great kingdom.
21.Upon them shall be green garments of silk and brocade; they are adorned withbracelets of silver, and their Lord shall give them to drink a pure draught.
22.`Behold, this is a recompense for you, and your striving is thanked.'
23.Surely We have sent down the Koran on thee, a sending down;
24.so be thou patient under the judgment of thy Lord, and obey not one of them,sinner or unbeliever.
25.And remember the Name of thy Lord at dawn and in the evening
%580% 26.and part of the night; bow down before Him and magnify Him through the longnight.
27.Surely these men love the hasty world, and leave be behind them a heavy day.
28.We created them, and We strengthened their joints; and, when We will, We shallexchange their likes.
29.Surely this is a Reminder; so he who will, takes unto his Lord a way.
30.But you will not unless God wills; surely God is ever All-knowing,All-wise.
31.For He admits into His mercy whomsoever He will; as for the evildoers, He hasprepared for them a painful chastisement.
<77,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the loosed ones successively
2.storming tempestuously
3.by the scatterers scattering
4.and the severally severing
5.and those hurling a reminder
6.excusing or warning,
7.surely that which you are promised is about to fall!
8.When the stars shall be extinguished,
9.when heaven shall be split
10.when the mountains shall be scattered
11.and when the Messengers' time is set,
12.to what day shall they be delayed?
13.To the Day of Decision.
14.And what shall teach thee what is the Day of Decision?
15.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies !
16.Did We not destroy the ancients,
17.and then follow them with the later folk?
18.So We serve the sinners.
19.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
%581% 20.Did We not create you of a mean water,
21.that We laid within a sure lodging
22.till a known term decreed?23.We determined; excellent determiners are We.
24.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
25.Made We not the earth to be a housing
26.for the living and for the dead?
27.Set We not therein soaring mountains? Sated you with sweetest water?
28.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
29.Depart to that you cried was lies!
30.Depart to a triple-massing shadow
31.unshading against the blazing flame
32.that shoots sparks like dry faggots,
33.sparks like to golden herds.
34.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
35.This is the day they shall not speak
36.neither be given leave, and excuse themselves.
37.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
38.`This is the Day of Decision; We have joined you with the ancients;
39.if you have a trick, try you now to trick Me!'
40.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
41.Truly the godfearing shall dwell amid shades and fountains,
42.and such fruits as their hearts desire:
43.`Eat and drink, with wholesome appetite, for that you were working.'
44.Even so do We recompensethe good-doers.
45.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
46.`Eat and take your joy a little; you are sinners!'
47.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
48.When it is said to them, `Prostrate yourselves!' they prostrate not.
49.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
50.In what discourse after this will they believe?
%582% <78,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Of what do they question one another?
2.Of the mighty tiding
3.whereon they are at variance.
4.No indeed; they shall soon know!
5.Again, no indeed; they shall soon know!
6.Have We not made the earth as a cradle
7.and the mountains as pegs?
8.And We created you in pairs,
9.and We appointed your sleep for a rest;
10.and We appointed night for a garment,
11.and We appointed day for a livelihood.
12.And We have built above you seven strong ones heavens.,
13.and We appointed a blazing lamp sun
14.and have sent down out of the rain-clouds water cascading
15.that We may bring forth thereby grain and plants,
16.and gardens luxuriant.
17.Surely the Day of Decision is an appointed time,
18.the day the Trumpet is blown, and you shall come in troops,
19.and heaven is opened, and become gates,
20.and the mountains are set in motion, and become a vapour.
21.Behold, Gehenna Hell has become an ambush,
22.for the insolent a resort,
23.therein to tarry for ages,
24.tasting therein neither coolness nor any drink
25.save boiling water and pus
26.for a suitable recompense.
27.They indeed hoped not for a reckoning,
28.and they cried loud lies to Our signs;
29.and everything We have numbered in a Book.
30.`Taste! We shall increase you not save in chastisement.'
%583% 31.Surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security,
32.gardens and vineyards
33.and maidens like of age,
34.and a cup overflowing.
35.Therein they shall hear no idle talk, no cry of lies,
36.for a recompense from thy Lord, a gift, a reckoning,
37.Lord of the heavens and earth, and all that between them is, the All-mercifulof whom they have no power to speak.
38.Upon the day when the Spirit and the angels stand in ranks they shall speaknot, save him to whom the All-merciful has given leave, and who speaksaright.
39.That is the true day; so whosoever wills takes unto his Lord a resort.
40.Lo, We have warned you of a nigh chastisement, upon the day when a man shallbehold what his hands have forwarded, and the unbeliever shall say, `O wouldthat I were dust!'
<79,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By those that pluck out wicked souls violently vehemently
2.and those that draw out blessed souls gently.,
3.by those that swim serenely
4.and those that outstrip suddenly
5.by those that direct an affair!
6.Upon the day when the first blast shivers
7.and the second blast follows it,
8.hearts upon that day shall be athrob
9.and their eyes shall be humbled.
10.They shall say, `What, are we being restored as we were before?
11.What, when we are bones old and wasted?'
12.They shall say, `That then were a losing return!'
13.But it shall be only a single scare,
14.and behold, they are awakened.
15.Hast thou received the story of Moses?
%584% 16.When his Lord called to him in the holy valley, Towa:
17.`Go to Pharaoh; he has waxed insolent.
18.And say, "Hast thou the will to purify thyself,
19.and that I should guide thee to thy Lord, then thou shalt fear?
20."`So he showed him the great sign,
21.but he cried lies, and rebelled,
22.then he turned away hastily,
23.then he mustered and proclaimed,
24.and he said, `I am your Lord, the Most High!
25.`So God seized him with the chastisement of the Last World and theFirst.
26.Surely in that is a lesson for him who fears!
27.What, are you stronger in constitution or the heaven He built?
28.He lifted up its vault, and levelled it,
29.and darkened its night, and brought forth its forenoon;
30.and the earth--after that He spread it out,
31.therefrom brought forth its waters and its pastures,
32.and the mountains He set firm,
33.an enjoyment for you and your flocks.
34.Then, when the Great Catastrophe comes
35.upon the day when man shall remember what he has striven,
36.and Hell is advanced for whoever sees,
37.then as for him who was insolent
38.and preferred the present life,
39.surely Hell shall be the refuge.
40.But as for him who feared the Station of his Lord and forbade the soul itscaprice,
41.surely Paradise shall be the refuge.
42.They will question thee concerning the Hour, when it shall berth.
43.What art thou about, to mention it?
44.Unto thy Lord is the final end of it.
45.Thou art only the warner of him who fears it.
46.It shall be as if, on the day they see it,they have but tarried for an evening, or its forenoon.
%585% <80,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.He frowned and turned away
2.that the blind man came to him.
3.And what should teach thee? Perchance he would cleanse him,
4.or yet remember, and the Reminder profit him.
5.But the self-sufficient,
6.to him thou attendest
7.though it is not thy concern, if he dose not cleanse himself.
8.And he who comes to thee eagerly
9.and fearfully,
10.to him thou payest no heed.
11.No indeed; it is a Reminder
12.and whoso wills, shall remember it
13.upon pages high-honoured,
14.uplifted, purified,
15.by the hands of scribes
16.noble, pious.
17.Perish Man! How unthankful he is!
18.Of what did He create him?
19.Of a sperm-drop He created him, and determined him,
20.then the way eased for him,
21.then makes him to die, and buries him,
22.then, when He wills, He raises him.
23.No indeed! Man has not accomplished His bidding.
24.Let Man consider his nourishment.
25.We poured out the rains abundantly,
26.then We split the earth in fissures
27.and therein made grains to grow
28.and vines, and reeds,
29.and olives, and palms,
30.and dense-tree'd gardens,
31.and fruits, and pastures,
32.an enjoyment for you and your flocks.
33.And when the Blast shall sound,
34.upon the day when a man shall flee from his brother,
35.his mother, his father,
36.his consort, his sons,
37.every man that day shall have business to suffice him.
38.Some faces on that day shall shine
39.laughing, joyous;
40.some faces on that day shall be dusty
41.o'erspread with darkness--
42.those--they are the unbelievers, the libertines.
%586% <81,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When the sun shall be darkened,
2.when the stars shall be thrown down,
3.when the mountains shall be set moving,
4.when the pregnant camels shall be neglected,
5.when the savage beasts shall be mustered,
6.when the seas shall be set boiling,
7.when the souls shall be coupled,
8.when the buried infant shall be asked
9.for what sin she was slain,
10.when the scrolls be unrolled,
11.when heaven shall be stripped off,
12.when Hell shall be set blazing,
13.when paradise shall be brought nigh,
14.then shall a soul know what it has produced.
15.No! I swear by the slinkers planets that recede.,
16.the runners, the sinkers,
17.by the night swarming,
18.by the dawn sighing,
19.truly this is the word of a noble Messenger
20.having power, with the Lord of the Throne secure,
21.obeyed, moreover trusty.
22.Your companion is not possessed;
23.he truly saw him on the clear horizon;
24.he is not niggardly of the Unseen.
25.And it is not the word of an accursed Satan;
26.where then are you going?
27.It is naught but a Reminder unto all beings,
28.for whosoever of you who would go straight;
29.but will you shall not, unless God wills, the Lord of all Being.
%587% <82,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When heaven is split open,
2.when the stars are scattered,
3.when the seas swarm over,
4.when the tombs are overthrown,
5.then a soul shall know its works, the former and the latter.
6.O Man! What deceived thee as to thy generous Lord
7.who created thee and shaped thee and wrought thee in symmetry
8.and composed thee after what form He would?
9.No indeed; but you cry lies to the Doom;
10.yet there are over you watchers
11.noble, writers
12.who know whatever you do.
13.Surely the pious shall be in bliss,
14.and the libertines shall be in a fiery furnace
15.roasting therein on the Day of Doom,
16.nor shall theyever be absent from it.
17.And what shall teach thee what is the Day of Doom?
18.Again, what shall teach thee what is the Day of Doom?
19.A day when no soul shall possess aught to succour another soul; that day theCommand shall belong unto God.
<83,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Woe to the stinters defrauders.
2.who, when they measure against the people, take full measure
3.but, when they measure for them or weigh for them, do skimp.
4.Do those not think that they shall be raised up
5.unto a mighty day
6.a day when mankind shall stand before the Lord of all Being?
%588% 7.No indeed; the Book of the libertines is in Sijjin;
8.and what shall teach thee what is Sijjin?
9.A book inscribed.
10.Woe that day unto those who cry it lies,
11.who cry lies to the Day of Doom;
12.and none cries lies to it but every guilty aggressor.
13.When our signs are recited to him, he says, 'Fairy-tales of the ancients!'
14.No indeed; but that they were earning has rusted upon their hearts.
15.No indeed;but upon that day they shall be veiled from theirLord,
16.then they shall roast in Hell.
17.Then it shall be said to them, `This is that you cried lies to.'
18.No indeed; the book of the pious is in Illiyun;
19.and what shall teach thee what is Illiyun?
20.A book inscribed,
21.witnessed by those brought nigh.
22.Surely the pious shall be in bliss,
23.upon couches gazing;
24.thou knowest in their faces the radiancy of bliss
25.as they are given of a wine sealed
26.whose seal is musk--so after let the strivers strive--
27.and whose mixture is Tasnim,
28.a fountain at which do drink those brought nigh.
29.Behold, the sinners were laughing at the believers,
30.when they passed them by winking at one another,
31.and when they returned to their people they returned blithely,
32.and when they saw them they said, `Lo, these men are astray!'
33.Yet they were not sent as watchers over them.
%589% 34.So today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers,
35.upon couches gazing.
36.Have the unbelievers been rewardedwhat they were doing?
<84,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When heaven is rent asunder
2.and gives ear to its Lord, and is fitly disposed;
3.when earth is stretched out
4.and casts forth what is in it, and voids itself,
5.and gives ear to its Lord, and is fitly disposed!
6.O Man! Thou art labouring unto thy Lord laboriously,and thou shalt encounter Him.
7.Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand,
8.he shall surely receive an easy reckoning
9.and he return to his family joyfully.
10.But as for him who is given his book behind his back,
11.he shall call for destruction
12.and he shall roast at a Blaze.
13.He once lived among his family joyfully;
14.he surely thought he would never revert.
15.Yes indeed; his Lord had sight of him.
16.No! I swear by the twilight
17.and the night and what it envelops
18.and the moon when it is at the full,
19.you shall surely ride stage after stage.
20.Then what ails them, that they believe not,
21.SUJDAH AYA @and when the Koran is recited to them they do not bow?
22.Nay, but the unbelievers are crying lies,
23.and God knows very well what they are secreting.
24.So give them good tidings of a painful chastisement,
25.except those that believe, and do righteous deeds--theirs shall be a wage unfailing.
%590% <85,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By heaven of the constellations,
2.by the promised day,
3.by the witness and the witnessed,
4.slain were the Men of the Pit,
5.the fire abounding in fuel,
6.when they were seated over it
7.and were themselves witnesses of what they did with the believers.
8.They took revenge on them only because they believed in God the All-mighty,the All-laudable,
9.to whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and God is Witnessover everything.
10.Those who persecute the believers, men and women, and then have not repented,there awaits them the chastisement of Gehenna, and there awaits them thechastisement of the burning.
11.Those who believe, and do righteous deeds, for them await gardens underneathwhich rivers flow; that is the great triumph.
12.Surely thy Lord's assault is terrible.
13.Surely it is He who originates, and brings again,
14.and He is the All-forgiving, the All-loving,
15.Lord of the Throne, the All-glorious,
16.Performer of what He desires.
17.Hast thou received the story of the hosts,
18.Pharaoh and Thamood?
19.Nay, but the unbelievers still cry lies,
20.and God is behind them, encompassing.
21.Nay, but it is a glorious Koran,
22.in a guarded tablet.
%591% <86,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By heaven and the night-star!
2.And what shall teach thee what is the night-star?
3.The piercing star!
4.Over every soul there is a watcher.
5.So let man consider of what he was created;
6.he was created of gushing water
7.issuing between the loins and the breast-bones.
8.Surely He is able to bring him back
9.upon the day when the secrets are tried,
10.and he shall have no strength, no helper.
11.By heaven of the returning rain,
12.by earth splitting with verdure,
13.surely it is a decisive word;
14.it is no merriment.
15.They are devising guile,
16.and I am devising guile.
17.So respite the unbelievers; delay with them awhile.
<87,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Magnify the Name of thy Lord the Most High
2.who created and shaped,
3.who determined and guided,
4.who brought forth the pasturage
5.then made it a blackening wrack.
6.We shall make thee recite, to forget not
7.save what God wills; surely He knows what is spoken aloud and what is hidden.
8.We shall ease thee unto the Easing.
9.Therefore remind, if the Reminder profits,
10.and he who fears shall remember,
11.but the most wretched shall flout it,
12.even he who shall roast in the Great Fire,
13.then he shall neither die therein, nor live.
14.Prosperous is he who has cleansed himself,
%592% 15.and mentions the Name of his Lord, and prays.
16.Nay, but you prefer the present life;
17.and the world to come is better, and more enduring.
18.Surely this is in the ancient scrolls,
19.the scrolls of Abraham and Moses.
<88,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Hast thou received the story of the Enveloper?
2.Faces on that day humbled,
3.labouring, toilworn,
4.roasting at a scorching fire,
5.watered at a boiling fountain,
6.no food for them but cactus thorn
7.unfattening, unappeasing hunger.
8.Faces on that day jocund,
9.with their striving well-pleased,
10.in a sublime Garden,
11.hearing there no babble;
12.therein a running fountain,
13.therein uplifted couches
14.and goblets set forth
15.and cushions arrayed
16.and carpets outspread.
17.What, do they not consider how the camel was created,
18.how heaven was lifted up,
19.how the mountains were hoisted,
20.how the earth was outstretched?
21.Then remind them! Thou art only a reminder;
22.thou art not charged to oversee them.
23.But he who turns his back, and disbelieves,
24.God shall chastise him with the greatest chastisement.
25.Truly, to Us is their return;
26.then upon Us shall rest their reckoning.
%593% <89,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the dawn
2.and ten nights,
3.by the even and the odd,
4.by the night when it journeys on!
5.Is there in that an oath for a mindful man?
6.Hast thou not seen how thy Lord did with Ad,
7.Iram of the pillars,
8.the like of which was never created in the land,
9.and Thamood, who hollowed the rocks in the valley,
10.and Pharaoh, he of the tent-pegs,
11.who all were insolent in the land
12.and worked much corruption therein?
13.Thy Lord unloosed on them a scourge of chastisement;
14.surely thy Lord is ever on the watch.
15.As for man, whenever his Lord tries him, and honours him, and blesses him,then he says, `My lord has honoured me.'
16.But when he tries him and stints for him his provision, then he says, `MyLord has despised me.'
17.No indeed; but you honour not the orphan,
18.and you urge not the feeding of the needy,
19.and you devour the inheritance greedily,
20.and you love wealth with an ardent love.
21.No indeed! When the earth s ground to powder,
22.and thy Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank,
23.and Gehenna Hell is brought out, upon that dayman will remember; and how shall the Reminder be for him?
%594% 24.He shall say, `O would that I had forwarded for my life!'
25.Upon that day none shall chastise as He chastises,
26.none shall bind as He binds.
27.`O soul at peace,
28.return unto thy Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing!
29.Enter thou among My servants!
30.Enter thou My Paradise!'
<90,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.No! I swear by this land,
2.and thou art a lodger in this land;
3.by the begetter, and that he begot,
4.indeed, We created man in trouble.
5.What, does he think none has power over him,
6.saying, `I have consumed wealth abundant'?
7.What, does he think none has seen him?
8.Have We not appointed to him two eyes,
9.and a tongue, and two lips,
10.and guided him on the two highways?
11.Yet he has not assaulted the steep;
12.and what shall teach thee what is the steep?
13.The freeing of a slave,
14.or giving food upon a day of hunger
15.to an orphan near of kin
16.or a needy man in misery;
17.then that he become of those who believeand counsel each other to be steadfast,and counsel each other to be merciful.
18.Those are the Companions of the Right Hand.
19.And those who disbelieve in Our signs,they are the Companions of the Left Hand;
20.over them is a Fire covered down.
%595% <91,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the sun and his morning brightness
2.and by the moon when she follows him,
3.and by the day when it displays him
4.and by the night when it enshrouds him!
5.By the heaven and That which built it
6.and by the earth and That which extended it!
7.By the soul, and That which shaped it
8.and inspired it to lewdness and godfearing!
9.Prosperous is he who purifies it,
10.and failed has he who seduces it.
11.Thamood cried lies in their insolence
12.when the most wretched of them uprose,
13.then the Messenger of God said to them,`The She-camel of God; let her drink!'
14.But they cried him lies, and hamstrung her,so their Lord crushed them for their sin, and levelled them;
15.and He fears not the issue thereof.
<92,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the night enshrouding
2.and the day in splendour
3.and That which created the male and the female,
4.Surely your striving is to diverse ends.
5.As for him who gives and is godfearing
6.and confirms the reward most fair,
7.We shall surely ease him to the Easing.
8.But as for him who is a miser, and self-sufficient,
9.and cries lies to the reward most fair,
10.We shall surely ease him to the Hardship;
11.his wealth shall not avail him when he perishes.
12.Surely upon Us rests the guidance,
13.and to Us belong the Last and the First.
14.Now I have warned you of a Fire that flames,
%596% 15.whereat none but the most wretched shall be roasted,
16.even he who cried lies, and turned away;
17.and from which the most godfearing shall be removed,
18.even he who gives his wealth to purify himself
19.and confers no favour onany man for recompense,
20.only seeking the Face of his Lord the Most High;
21.and he shall surely be satisfied.
<93,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the white forenoon
2.and the brooding night!
3.Thy Lord has neither forsaken thee nor hates thee
4.and the Last shall be better for thee than the First.
5.Thy Lord shall give thee, and thou shalt be satisfied.
6.Did He not find thee an orphan, and shelter thee?
7.Did He not find thee erring, and guide thee?
8.Did He not find thee needy, and suffice thee?
9.As for the orphan, do not oppress him,
10.and as for the beggar, scold him not;
11.and as for thy Lord's blessing, declare it.
<94,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Did we not expand thy breast for thee
2.and lift from thee thy burden,
3.the burden that weighed down thy back?
4.Did we not exalt thy fame?
5.So truly with hardship comes ease,
6.truly with hardship comes ease.
7.So when thou art empty, labour,
8.and let thy Lord be thy Quest.
%597% <95,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the fig and the olive
2.and the Mount Sinai
3.and this land secure!
4.we indeed created Man in the fairest stature
5.then we restored him the lowest of the low--
6.save those who believe, and do righteous deeds; they shall have a wageunfailing.
7.What then shall cry thee lies as to the Doom?
8.Is not God the justest of judges?
<96,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Recite: In the Name of thy lord who created,
2.created Man of a blood-clot.
3.Recite:And thy Lord is the Most Generous,
4.who taught by the Pen,
5.taught Man that he knew not.
6.No indeed; surely Man waxes insolent,
7.for he thinks himself self-sufficient.
8.Surely unto thy Lord is the Returning.
9.What thinkest thou? He who forbids
10.a servant when he prays--
11.What thinkest thou? If he were upon guidance
12.or bade to godfearing--
13.What thinkest thou? If he cries lies, and turns away--
14.Did he not know that God sees?
15.No indeed; surely,if he gives not over, we shall seize him by theforelock,
16.a lying, sinful forelock.
17.So let him call on his concourse!
18.We shall call on the guards of Hell.
19.SUJDAH AYA @No indeed; do thou not obey him, and bow thyself, anddraw nigh.
%598% <97,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Behold, We sent it down on the Night of Power;
2.And what shall teach thee what is the Night of Power?
3.The Night of power is better than a thousand months;
4.in it the angels and the Spirit descend,by the leave of their Lord, upon every command.
5.peace it is, till the rising of dawn.
<98,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters would never leaveoff, till the Clear Sign came to them,
2.a Messenger from God, reciting pages purified,
3.therein true Books.
4.And they scattered not, those that were given the Book, excepting after theClear Sign came to them
5.They were commanded only to serve God, making the religion His sincerely,men of pure faith, and to perform the prayer, and pay the alms--that isthe religion of the True.
6.The unbelievers of the People of the Book and the idolaters shall be in theFire of Gehenna, therein dwelling forever; those are the worst of creatures.
7.But those who believe, and do righteous deeds, those are the best ofcreatures;
%599% 8.their recompense is with their Lord--Gardens of Eden, underneath which riversflow, therein dwelling for ever and ever.God is well-pleased with them, andthey are well-pleased with Him; that is for him who fears his Lord.
<99,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When earth is shaken with a mighty shaking
2.and earth brings forth her burdens,
3.and Man says, `What ails her?'
4.upon that day she shall tell her Tidings
5.for that her Lord has inspired her.
6.Upon that day men shall issue in scatterings to see their works,
7.and whoso has done an atom's weight of good shall see it,
8.and whoso has done an atom's weight of evil shall see it.
<100,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the snorting chargers,
2.by the strikers of fire,
3.by the dawn-raiders
4.blazing a trail of dust,
5.cleaving there with a host!
6.Surely Man is ungrateful to his Lord,
7.and surely he a witness against that!
8.Surely he is passionate in his love for wealth good things of this world.
9.Knows he not that when that which is in the tombs is over-thrown,
%600% 10.and that which is in the breasts is brought out--
11.surely on that day their Lord shall be aware of them!
<101,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.The Clatterer!
2.What is the Clatterer!?
3.And what shall teach thee what is the Clatterer!
4.The day that man shall be like scattered moths,
5.and the mountains shall be like plucked wool-tufts.
6.Then he whose deeds weigh heavy in the Balance
7.shall inherit a pleasing life,
8.but he whose deeds weigh light in the Balance
9.shall plunge in the womb of the Pit.
10.And what shall teach thee what is the Pit?
11.A blazing Fire!
<102,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Gross rivalry diverts you,
2.even till you visit the tombs.
3.No indeed; but soon you shall know.
4.Again, no indeed; but soon you shall know.
5.No indeed; did you know with the knowledge of certainty,
6.you shall surely see Hell.
7.Again, you shall surely see it with the eye of certainty
8.then you shall be questioned that day concerning true bliss.
%601% <103,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.By the afternoon!
2.Surely Man is in the way of loss,
3.save those who believe, and do righteous deeds, and counsel each other untothe truth, and counsel each to be steadfast.
<104,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Woe unto every backbiter, slanderer,
2.who has gathered riches and counted them over
3.thinking his riches have made him immortal!
4.No indeed; he shall be thrust into the Crusher;
5.and what shall teach thee what is the Crusher?
6.The Fire Of God kindled
7.roaring over the hearts
8.covered down upon them,
9.in columns outstretched.
<105,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Hast thou not seen how thy Lord did with the Men of the Elephant?
2.Did He not make their guile to go astray?
3.And He loosed upon them birds in flights,
4.hurling against them stones of baked clay
5.and He made them like green blades devoured.
%602% <106,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.For the composing of Koraish,
2.their composing for the winter and summer caravan!
3.So let them serve the Lord of this House
4.who has fed them against hunger.and secured them from fear.
<107,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Hast thou seen him who cries lies to the Doom?
2.That is he who repulses the orphan
3.and urges not the feeding of the needy.
4.So woe to those that pray worshippers.
5.and are heedless of their prayers,
6.to those who make display
7.and refuse charity.
<108,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Surely We have given thee abundance;
2.so pray unto thy Lord and sacrifice.
3.Surely he that hates thee, he is the one cut off.
%603% <109,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Say: `O unbelievers,
2.I serve not what you serve
3.and you are not serving what I serve,
4.nor am I serving what you have served,
5.neither are you serving what I serve.
6.To you your religion, and to me my religion!'
<110,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.When comes the help of God, and victory,
2.and thou seest men entering God's religion in throngs,
3.then proclaim the praise of thy Lord, and seek His forgiveness; for He turnsagain unto men.
<111,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Perish the hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he!
2.His wealth avails him not, neither what he has earned;
3.he shall roast at a flaming fire
4.and his wife, the carrier of the firewood,
5.upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre.
%604% <112,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Say: `He is God, One,
2.God, the Everlasting Refuge,
3.who has not begotten, and has not been begotten,
4.and equal to Him is not any one.'
<113,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Say: `I take refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak
2.from the evil of what He has created,
3.from the evil of darkness when it gathers,
4.from the evil of the women who blow on knots,
5.from the evil of an envier when he envies.'
<114,0>
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
1.Say: `I take refuge with the Lord of men,
2.the King of men,
3.the God of men,
4.from the evil of the slinking whisperer
5.who whispers in the breasts of men
6.of jinn and men.

